A senior ANZ executive had his arm around Pankaj Oswal's neck as he told the Indian businessman to "bloody well sign or we will destroy you", a court has heard.
Mr Oswal was stooped forward under the weight of then ANZ chief risk officer Chris Page's arm around his neck, the Victorian Supreme Court heard.
A lawyer who walked in on the pair will give evidence that "this was not a friendly gesture", said barrister Garry Rich SC, appearing for Mr Oswal's wife Radhika.
The court heard Mr Oswal said Mr Page told him: "Bloody well sign the documents or we will destroy you."
"Extraordinary conduct apt no doubt to intimidate not only Mr Oswal but his wife who was obviously concerned for him," Mr Rich said.
The Oswals want up to $2.5 billion in damages from the ANZ and receivers, appointed in December 2010, over the sale of their 65 per cent stake in Burrup Holdings.
The court has heard Mr Page described the Oswals as devious and unsavoury characters in racist remarks in an email to the bank's CEO, sent after the heated meetings in December 2009.
Mr Rich on Thursday said Mr Oswal was extremely flustered after Mr Page used physical force against him during an impasse in negotiations.
The court has heard the ANZ told Mrs Oswal her husband had admitted falsifying security documents and could go to jail for fraud if she did not cover almost $US1 billion in debts.
Mr Rich said during a private discussion with the couple, Mr Page told Mrs Oswal she needed to do what the bank wanted or else there would be consequences.
Mrs Oswal said she had done nothing wrong and was told by Mr Page that some in the bank believed she was involved and she could go to jail as well, Mr Rich said.
"He also made it plain that the bank did not want the forgeries to become public and they would be irrelevant once the bank was repaid," Mr Rich said.
Mrs Oswal did not want to risk her own wealth and hundreds of millions of dollars in assets by putting up her stake in Australian fertiliser business Burrup Holdings as security for $US928 million in debts, the court heard.
After the meetings on December 20 and 21, 2009, Mrs Oswal gave the ANZ a guarantee making herself personally liable for $US568 million in debts.
"The events of those two days could hardly be described as ordinary or usual or what the court would expect would occur in transactions involving one of the largest corporations in this country dealing with individuals," Mr Rich said.
The ANZ and receivers will outline their case next week, including allegations that Mr Oswal misappropriated funds from the fertiliser company.
