Share this Story: AGAR: A sad sign to see Soleimani supporters in Canada
Get Toronto Sun and 15 others for $2/week for 24 weeks.
Get Toronto Sun, Ottawa Sun and 14 others for $2/week for 24 weeks.
This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
AGAR: A sad sign to see Soleimani supporters in Canada Photo by NAIF RAHMA / REUTERS
Article content Here is what is arguable. Whether U.S. President Donald Trump should have authorized a drone attack that took out terrorist Qassem Soleimani, whether it should have been done while Soleimani was in Iraq and of course, what the fallout might be.
Advertisement 2 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Article content Here is what is not arguable. Soleimani was a terrorist and supporting, lauding and mourning him is quite simply support of terrorism. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or AGAR: A sad sign to see Soleimani supporters in Canada Back to video One would hope that an outpouring of support for Soleimani would happen only in Iraq, perhaps in some other Middle Eastern location full of anti-American, anti-Western religious fanatics, but not in the streets of Canadian cities. Shockingly, one would hope in vain. The Edmonton Journal wrote, “Supporters of an Iranian general killed in a U.S. airstrike rallied in front of the Alberta legislature Sunday night.” “Several lit candles and placed them in front of a framed photo of Gen. Qassem Soleimani,” the paper reported. In Toronto a gathering that was promoted by group the Mahdi Youth Society, a Canadian Islamic organization, saw attendees build a makeshift shrine to the dead terrorist. People shouted, “Down with USA and Israel,” and honoured “the heroes of Islam.”
Advertisement 3 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Article content All of that was done in full public view with no fear of repercussions from authorities, an irony no doubt lost on the thick-headed people participating. And to Ontario’s enduring embarrassment – those in other provinces may feel free to mock and condemn us – two of those marching at one of the rallies over the weekend that included support for Soleimani were elected officials in the Ontario government. NDP MPPs Marit Stiles and Rima Berns-McGown marched along with the supporters and flags of, as Brian Lilley reported in the Toronto Sun, “the Iraqi paramilitary group, the PMF or Popular Mobilization Forces, and of course, a flag from the terrorist group, Hezbollah, one of the groups that the dead Solemani helped fund and assist with military and terrorist activities.”
Advertisement 4 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Article content Hezbollah is listed as a banned terrorist organization by the Canadian government. The National Post recently wrote: “In Canada, Hezbollah is “primarily involved in logistics and operational support activities and fundraising destined for terrorist purposes overseas,” the RCMP said in a statement.” Yet Stiles and Berns-McGowan marched along with those flags and organizations, while Berns-McGown used Twitter to encourage others to, “Come on out if you are able” to what she characterized as an anti-war rally. Perhaps the MPPs were misinformed as to the nature of the event, but they did not leave when it would have been obvious that terror supporters were also participating. They, and their leader Andrea Horwath, make no apology for their support of the rally.
Advertisement 5 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Article content Sadly Trump Derangement Syndrome is so strong for some people in Canada that they will choose a terrorist over Trump, to the danger of their fellow Canadians. Will good people who belong to the NDP in Ontario speak up and contact the party? Perhaps, but the NDP is sadly rife with fringe kooks. I wish that weren’t true. Have authorities taken photos and videos of those rallying to support terrorism? I hope so. Those people bear watching. In Toronto some Iranian-Canadians danced and celebrated the death of the terrorist. How disappointing that they had to witness support for Soleimani in their adopted homeland, one they live in at least partly due to their escape of the violence he planned and perpetrated in Iraq and beyond. Terrorism is the scourge of our times. That terrorist sympathizers live and organize in Canada is sad, shocking and dangerous. We apologize, but this video has failed to load.
tap here to see other videos from our team. Try refreshing your browser, or
Latest National Stories Advertisement 1 Story continues below This advertisement has not loaded yet, but your article continues below.
Your Midday Sun From our newsroom to your inbox at noon, the latest headlines, stories, opinion and photos from the Toronto Sun. Email Address There was an error, please provide a valid email address. By clicking on the sign up button you consent to receive the above newsletter from Postmedia Network Inc. You may unsubscribe any time by clicking on the unsubscribe link at the bottom of our emails. Postmedia Network Inc. | 365 Bloor Street East, Toronto, Ontario, M4W 3L4 | 416-383-2300 Thanks for signing up! A welcome email is on its way. If you don't see it, please check your junk folder. The next issue of Your Midday Sun will soon be in your inbox. We encountered an issue signing you up. Please try again