Nigel Farage is the only politician willing to stand up for British women. He is the only one willing to point out the potential dangers in mass immigration of young men from cultures with very different views of women than our own.
This is the irony of our time. When so many feminists are in hiding or in denial about the real and present danger such uncontrolled immigration might cause, Farage, the Little Englander, is left to raise the issue and gets vilified in the process.
This is not even the main issue for Farage, and he knew by raising it he would hounded by left and right. The ever so high and mighty yet utterly useless Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev Justin Welby, says Farage is fuelling racism.
This is merely an attempt to shut down the debate. Rev Welby would do well to try and stem the tide of those abandoning his own church in Britain as well as highlighting the plight of Christians around the world fleeing death and persecution.
Farage is merely pointing out the obvious. Mass uncontrolled immigration of unaccompanied young men from a foreign culture is dangerous for women and children. For me, in fact it is barely an issue of race. If you took the entire male population of each and every rugby club up and down England between the ages of 18 – 25 and dumped them on some small village somewhere, I hazard a guess the crime rate would increase.
I have said it before and I will say it again, young men need very close supervision and moral guidance. Men who respect and protect women and children are built, they do not just appear in the blink of an eye. And I am sorry but a ‘consent’ class given by some hapless feminist is just not going to cut it.
Could we accommodate small groups of men, even with their derogatory views of women? Probably, once we make it clear that they must abide by our rules and our norms. But that is not what happens in Britain. Not only do we import huge numbers of young men, but also accommodate their derogatory views of women and girls with the poisonous ideology of multiculturalism, so beloved of the Left. This is because the liberals want to destroy British society built on Christian norms, which Welby seems barely to care about.
Thank God for men like Farage, is all I can say. His mother obviously did something right. He no doubt does not want drop his two daughters in it for the sake of ‘looking nice and cuddly’.
The likes of Cameron and Welby seem to care nothing about the thousands of victims of sex crimes from Oxford to Rotherham. On Tuesday, The Times reported that the criminal inquiry into the Rotherham grooming scandal might last for 8 years with at least 10,000 leads being pursued. “An inquiry found that ‘almost all’ identified abusers were groups of men from the town’s Pakistani community and most known victims were young teenage white girls.”
But what does the metropolitican elite care about them? They are just the poor working class girls, not our precious little princesses.
So here’s to Nigel Farage. The fearsome freedom fighter of our time.
