Ghislaine Maxwell, 58, is seen in the last known photograph of her from 2016
An explosive new report has asserted that deceased sex criminal Jeffery Epstein and his alleged 'madame' Ghislaine Maxwell were foreign intelligence 'assets', and that she is currently hiding in a safehouse in Israel.
'Ghislaine is protected. She and Jeffrey were assets of sorts for multiple foreign governments. They would trade information about the powerful people caught in his net — caught at Epstein's house,' a unnamed source told Page Six.
Maxwell, 58, has been accused in lawsuits of procuring underage girls for Epstein to sexually traffick among his wealthy and powerful friends, and is reportedly the subject of an ongoing FBI probe.
She has always denied any wrongdoing. Her attorney did not immediately respond to an inquiry from DailyMail.com on Wednesday evening.
After Epstein's re-arrest last year and death behind bars in August, Maxwell has remained out of sight and her whereabouts unknown.
Maxwell, 58, has been accused in lawsuits of procuring underage girls for Epstein to sexually traffick among his wealthy and powerful friends. They are seen together on Wall Street in 2005
Now the Page Six source claims she is being protected by powerful foreign interests.
'She is not in the US, she moves around. She is sometimes in the UK, but most often in other countries, such as Israel, where her powerful contacts have provided her with safe houses and protection,' the source said.
Maxwell is being 'protected because of the information she has on the world's most powerful people,' the source said.
The source also claimed that Prince Andrew begged Maxwell to come forward and clear his name, after Virginia Roberts Giuffre claimed Epstein forced her to have sex with the royal when she was 17.
Prince Andrew, 59, strenuously denies having sex with Roberts and claims he can't remember meeting her despite a photograph of him with his arm around her.
'Andrew pleaded with Ghislaine to publicly defend him. She carefully considered it, but decided no good would come of it (if she came forward). It isn't in her best interests,' the source told Page Six.
Andrew resigned from royal duties after giving a disastrous interview on Newsnight in November.
Virginia Roberts photographed with Prince Andrew and Ghislaine Maxwell in early 2001. Maxwell reportedly was the one who first introduced Epstein and Andrew
It is not the first time that Epstein has been tied to a foreign intelligence service. Rumors have long circulated that Epstein secretly took videos of his rich and powerful friends having sex with underage girls, either for financial blackmail or as leverage for a foreign intelligence service.
So far, however, the FBI has not publicly confirmed whether any such blackmail material was recovered in raids on his properties.
Since Epstein's arrest on federal sex trafficking charges in July, Maxwell has remained out of sight, save for photos that purported to show her at an In-and-Out Burger in Los Angeles. DailyMail.com revealed that those photos were staged, possibly to throw investigators off of her trail.
Born in France, Maxwell is both a U.S. citizen and British subject. Her family's alleged ties to Israel's national intelligence service, Mossad, have been well documented.
Maxwell's father, Robert Maxwell, was a Czech-born British media mogul whose financial fraud in raiding the Mirror Group pension fund was discovered after his death in 1991.
Also a British member of parliament, Robert Maxwell reportedly had ties to British intelligence, the Soviet KGB, and Mossad — and was suspected of being a double or even triple agent by British Foreign Office officials.
Ghislaine (left) is seen in 1987 with her mother and father, the pension-raiding one-time owner of Britain's Daily Mirror and New York's Daily News, and alleged Mossad operative
After his mysterious death on his yacht, the Lady Ghislaine, off the Canary Islands in 1991, Robert Maxwell was buried in Jerusalem with high honors, with Israel's prime minister and multiple current and former heads of Israeli intelligence services in attendance at the funeral.
His favorite daughter, Ghislaine, first met Epstein in the early 1990s, at a party in New York City.
The two had a romantic relationship for several years, but the exact nature of their relationship over the following decades remains unclear.
Epstein's household staff have described her as 'Lady of the House' and sworn in depositions that she was at the center of managing his household affairs.
'They were like partners in business,' Janusz Banasiak, Epstein's house manager, said in a deposition.
Epstein's butler, Alfredo Rodriguez, described Ghislaine Maxwell in a deposition as 'the boss.'
Epstein's accusers have said that Maxwell's authority extended to managing the complex logistics of his perverse activities with girls as young as 14.
'She orchestrated the whole thing for Jeffrey,' said Sarah Ransome, one of some two dozen women who spoke out before a federal judge in New York in August.
Epstein and Maxwell are seen at Batman Forever premier in New York in 1995. Maxwell was close to Epstein for years and is reportedly the subject of an FBI probe into his inner circle
Maxwell is seen posing in 1999 for a photo shoot to promote Sotheby's vintage fashion collection that left assistants taken aback by her 'intensely sexual vibe'
Ghislaine Maxwell and Jeffrey Epstein are seen on a pheasant ahoot with Prince Andrew in Sandringham, Norfolk, Britain in December 2000
Some of the most serious allegations have come from Virginia Roberts Giuffre, who accused Maxwell in a lawsuit of luring her to become an international sex slave for Epstein and his pals.
Roberts says that she was 16 or 17 in the summer of 2000 and working as a towel girl at Mar-a-Lago when Maxwell approached her, eventually leading to her being flown around the world on Epstein's 'Lolita Express.'
Roberts' recently unsealed lawsuit claims that Maxwell 'actively took part in recruiting underage girls and young women for sex with Epstein, as well as scheduling the girls to come over, and maintaining a list of the girls and their phone number.'
Maxwell has strenuously denied in the past that she was involved in criminal sex trafficking or any other sex crimes.
After Epstein took a sweetheart plea deal in 2008 to state charges of procuring for prostitution and served a one-year jail sentence in Florida, Maxwell and Epstein were no longer spotted together at public events.
She remained active on the New York social scene for several years, however, until mounting lawsuits and allegations began to draw harsher scrutiny.
In April of 2016, the New York townhouse where she had lived was sold for $15 million, and around the fall of 2016, she was no longer seen or photographed publicly.
She was last spotted publicly at a social event in Geneva, Switzerland on June 8, less than a month prior to Epstein's re-arrest in the U.S.
Earlier this week, the Epstein accuser Virginia Roberts called for Maxwell to be brought forward to face the justice system.
Earlier this week, Epstein accuser Virginia Roberts Giuffre (seen in a BBC interview) called for Maxwell to be brought forward to face the justice system
'How is anyone, friend or family member, hiding such a monster?? 99% of the population would turn [in] Ghislaine Maxwell. Who's hiding who and why??' Roberts tweeted.
'Maxwell’s downfall will be her arrogance- in her eyes always above the law,' Roberts added.
'She is diabolically evil. I would suggest to whoever is hiding her or knows whereabouts she is, to turn her in as she’d easily throw anyone who gets in her way under the bus,' she continued.
Epstein died in federal custody in August while facing sex trafficking charges. His death was ruled a suicide by New York City's medical examiner, but his lawyers have disputed that finding.
Epstein's death, at age 66, came a little over a month after he was arrested and charged with trafficking dozens of underage girls as young as 14 from at least 2002 to 2005. Prosecutors said he recruited girls to give him massages, which became sexual in nature.