Iranian leaders issued strident calls on Friday for revenge against the United States after the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani in an overnight airstrike at the Baghdad airport. The strike spurred mass displays of public mourning by Iran and its network of allies across the Middle East.
Iranian leaders issued strident calls on Friday for revenge against the United States after the killing of Maj. Gen. Qassim Suleimani in an overnight airstrike at the Baghdad airport. The strike spurred mass displays of public mourning by Iran and its network of allies across the Middle East.
It’s not only Iran we have enemies from within and they come from the Democratic party.
As Allen West stated today Ilhan Omar has referred to now dead Quds Force Commander General Qassim Suleimani, as a foreign official.
Suleimani was the head of a designated Islamic terrorist organization. I suppose we shouldn’t be surprised. Omar is the same person who referred to 911 as “some people did something,” and has made countless anti-Semitic statements for which the Democrat (socialist) Party refused to hold her accountable. She disgraces the office and should not be a member of Congress. At a minimum, her security clearance — a privilege, not a right — should be revoked.
He discussed this today with Todd Starnes on his radio show. The segment begins at approximately the 01:20:08 mark.
Not only did she take the side of Iran, she vowed to stop President Trump, not the Iranian regime, from escalating things further.
“So what if Trump wants war, knows this leads to war and needs the distraction?” she said in her tweet hours after the strike.
“Real question is, will those with congressional authority step in and stop him? I know I will,” the Democrat representative vowed.
So what if Trump wants war, knows this leads to war and needs the distraction? Real question is, will those with congressional authority step in and stop him? I know I will. https://t.co/Fj9TMossEW — Ilhan Omar (@IlhanMN) January 3, 2020
She is a disgrace to America! She does not represent American values!
“No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and Vice-President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any State, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of the United States, or as a member of any State legislature, or as an executive or judicial officer of any State, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies thereof.”
Please share this article wherever you can. It is the only way we can work around their censorship and ensure people receive news about issues that Democrats and the mainstream media suppress.