Get the latest tech news & scoops — delivered daily to your inbox. Loading Something is loading. Email address By clicking ‘Sign up’, you agree to receive marketing emails from Insider as well as other partner offers and accept our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy
Tesla delivered 112,000 vehicles in the fourth quarter, helping the electric car company top its own guidance for the full year, in which it delivered 367,500 vehicles, the company said Friday.
The total is a 50% increase over 2018, Tesla said, and it is more than the previous two years combined.
Shares of Tesla jumped as much as 2% in early trading Friday morning following the news. For the quarter, Wall Street had expected roughly 106,000 total deliveries.
Final numbers could vary by 0.5% or more, the company warned, as paperwork is processed and finalized.
"We continue to focus on expanding production in both the US as well as our newly launched facility in Shanghai," the company said in a press release.
"Despite breaking ground at Gigafactory Shanghai less than 12 months ago, we have already produced just under 1,000 customer salable cars and have begun deliveries. We have also demonstrated production run-rate capability of greater than 3,000 units per week, excluding local battery pack production which began in late December."
The numbers could signal a turnaround at Tesla, which recently returned to profitability after a spate of negative earnings reports.
"While we are still taking a wait and see approach to see how sustainable this level of demand/profitability is going forward, based on recent data points out of Europe/China we continue to move one step closer to believing this Tesla turnaround story is real," Daniel Ives, an analyst at Wedbush Securities, said in a note to clients ahead of the deliveries report.
This week, Tesla delivered its first made-in-China cars to an initial batch of employees. Sales to the public are expected to begin on January 7, with the company slashing prices ahead of that date. Financial results for the quarter are expected to be released near the end of January, though the company has not yet confirmed an earnings date.
" If Tesla is able to sustain this level of profitability and demand for the company going forward, especially in Europe and China, then the stock (and bull thesis) will open up a new chapter of growth and multiple expansion in our opinion," Ives said.