A LAD has launched a reign of terror on his dad by shooting him every day with an electric-operated Nerf gun... and the reactions are hilarious.
Tom Lloyd, from Wolverhampton, decided to record his dad's daily riled responses as he blasts him with the little foam balls, which can travel up to 70mph.
7 A lad has begun his reign of terror on his dad by blasting him every day with a Nerf gun Credit: YouTube
The video, which was uploaded to YouTube earlier this week and captioned "Shot my dad every day with a nerf gun" shows Tom's father being subjected to multiple attacks.
Viewers can watch his hilarious and increasingly irritated reactions that range from amusement and anger to shock and sometimes even pain.
7 Tom Lloyd hilariously records his dad’s daily reactions as he shoots him Credit: YouTube
But despite Tom's best efforts, his dad does seem to remain fairly calm and collected - a stark contrast to how many other bombarded parents would react.
The montage of best moments has already been viewed over 139,000 times and received over 270 comments from other users, most of who are supporting the menace's dad.
7 The little balls can be seen firing at Tom's dad at around 70mph and his emotions range from amusement to anger Credit: YouTube
One YouTube commented on his cool composure: "He's like the opposite of angry dad"
While another said: "Your Dad seems proper nice. Every time you shoot him, he has a good sense of humour about it, or is angry for a second, then comes round. Fair play to him."
7 Tom uploaded the video to YouTube and it's already been viewed over 139,000 times Credit: YouTube
Someone else joked: "If I were the dad, I'd have bought the biggest f****** nerf machine gun out on the market, sneak into the kid's room when he's sleeping, and just go scarface on the little s***."
And others simply commended Tom for his funny footage: "legitimately laughed out loud almost the whole way through" and "This is hilarious!!"
This isn't the first time a dad has had to deal with his mischievous sons. Last month the sons of YouTube sensation Angry Dad pranked their father by attaching a "Honk if you're horny" sign to his car.
As he was driving through the area he was left baffled when his fellow motorists started beeping their horns at him.
7 An angry dad was left baffled on a recent drive when his fellow motorists all started beeping their horns at him – thanks to a hilarious prank Credit: YouTube
And his responses were priceless, if a little coarse at times, as he struggled to understand why he was attracting so much attention.
While son Mitchell giggled away in the passenger seat, his furious father shouted at the “f****** impatient drivers” behind him, asking: “What am I supposed to do, it’s f****** 80 (kph) here!”
7 His responses were priceless, if a little coarse at times, as he struggled to understand why he was attracting so much attention Credit: YouTube
As his fellow drivers passed him by they were clearly curious to see what the owner of the kinky sign looked like and peered into his car.
This sent Angry Dad into yet another meltdown as he raised his arms in frustrating, crying: “What are you looking at? Seriously, f****** hell man."