As we approach the 50th anniversary of John F. Kennedy’s assassination on November 22nd, there has come an onslaught of stories, books and movies tied to the occasion. As such, if there is any possible detail related to the assassination that could be possibly construed as an “unanswered question,” it will almost definitely be dredged up, washed off and re-presented to the world. Like the question of what happened to John F. Kennedy’s brain!
Yes, during JFK’s autopsy, his brain was placed in a stainless-steal container with a screw-top lid. According to James Swanson’s End of Days: The Assassination of John F. Kennedy (out in a few weeks), per the New York Post, the container was, at the time, “stored in a file cabinet in the office of the Secret Service.” Eventually, it made its way to a “footlocker,” along with other evidence, and then to the National Archives, where it was placed in a “secure room” under the jurisdiction of JFK’s former secretary. But—cue the dramatic chord progression—the brain disappeared! “In October 1966, it was discovered that the brain, the tissue slides and other autopsy materials were missing—and they have never been seen since,” Swanson said.
So, who has the brain? Crazy as it may seem, over four decades later, no one knows. An investigation was started by the Attorney General at the time, and yet a thief was never identified. But Swanson has a theory! The author clams there was “compelling evidence” that indicated JFK’s brother Robert pilfered the brain, with the help of his assistant. While some conspiracy theorists have espoused the view that the brain was stolen to cover up potential evidence that Kennedy was shot from the front rather than the back (i.e. supporting the “grassy knoll” theory), Swanson has a different explanation.
“My conclusion is that Robert Kennedy did take his brother’s brain—not to conceal evidence of a conspiracy but perhaps to conceal evidence of the true extent of President Kennedy’s illnesses, or perhaps to conceal evidence of the number of medications that President Kennedy was taking,” he said.
Okay, fine—sounds plausible, Swanson, sure. But where is the brain now? You’re really going to write a whole book all about JFK’s missing brain (note: the book is probably about other things, too, but let’s pretend it’s not) and not tell us where it is?! Show us that stainless-steal container, Swanson!