Three more administrators at the Phoenix VA Health Care System have been fired in the aftermath of investigations that focused on a breakdown in service to veterans and retaliation against hospital employees who tried to report mismanagement and corruption affecting patient care.
The Department of Veterans Affairs on Wednesday identified the terminated employees as Lance Robinson, associate director at the Carl T. Hayden VA Medical Center; Brad Curry, the chief of Health Administration Service; and Dr. Darren Deering, the hospital's chief of staff. According to a VA news release, they were removed for "negligent performance of duties and failure to provide effective oversight."
None of those fired could immediately be reached for comment. They are entitled to appeal.
"We have an obligation to veterans and the American people to take appropriate accountability actions as supported by evidence," VA Deputy Secretary Sloan Gibson said in a news release. "While this process took far too long, the evidence supports these removals and sets the stage for moving forward."
The personnel actions come more than two years after whistleblowers and the media exposed a huge backlog in medical appointments, as well as data manipulations that covered up delays in care. Audits and investigations subsequently revealed that the wait-time scandal was systemic throughout the VA. Then-VA Secretary Eric Shinseki was forced to resign amid the controversy, which also prompted reform legislation and an effort to overhaul the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Until Wednesday, former Phoenix VA Health Care System Director Sharon Helman was the only person fired in connection with the Arizona mismanagement. Helman is seeking reinstatement despite a federal felony conviction. Members of Congress and veterans' advocates have complained for months that other hospital administrators who were accused of wrongdoing remained on leave, and had not been disciplined or fired.
Can convicted ex-Phoenix VA boss get her old job back?
Robinson and Curry were initially suspended in mid-2014 based on Inspector General reports that tied them to the wait-time controversy, and also linked Robinson to whistleblower retaliation. Through legal counsel, he has denied wrongdoing.
In January, Robinson's attorneys demanded that the department either fire him or put him back on the job. A few weeks later, Robinson and Curry were taken off administrative leave and given alternate work assignments pending disciplinary decisions. Two months later, VA headquarters issued termination notices to all three administrators, and Gibson acknowledged their cases had become "a distraction to the progress being made" in Arizona and across the nation.
VA inspectors reject blame for delayed disciplining of Phoenix executives
In the news release Wednesday, VA officials included a long list of changes at the Phoenix hospital and nationally. That includes increased staffing, extended hours, outsourcing of appointments and other reforms to speed up and enhance medical care for veterans.
The termination announcement won grudging praise from Republicans and Democrats in Congress.
Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., said the decision was "a long-overdue step toward bringing justice and accountability ... We have a long way to go to reform this agency and ensure its leaders are able to swiftly fire any employee who denies or delays life-saving medical treatment to our veterans."
Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-Ariz., welcomed the firings while noting that "something is very wrong when it takes more than two years to do so … We have yet to see full accountability, and the VA still struggles with systemic problems. We cannot rest until these problems are rooted out."
Deering first worked at the Phoenix VA hospital in 1997 as a medical student, and returned in 2005 after several years at non-VA hospitals in the Valley. He earned awards as intern, resident and teacher of the year, according to his department biography, and also serves as a professor with the University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix.
Robinson became associate director at the Phoenix VA Medical Center in 2012 after holding a similar position with the VA hospital in Amarillo, Texas. He had been chairman of the Environment of Care Committee for the VA's Southwest region.