This report is for media and the general public.
The SMM observed a high number of ceasefire violations in Donetsk region, although fewer than on the previous day. In Luhansk region, the Mission observed more ceasefire violations - all overnight – than on the previous day. The SMM followed up on reports of shelling and shooting in Yasne and Stanytsia Luhanska. The Mission continued to monitor the withdrawal of weapons, and noted armoured combat vehicles in the security zone. In Lviv, the SMM monitored protests in front of the regional council. The Mission’s freedom of movement was restricted several times, both in areas controlled and not controlled by the Government.*
The SMM recorded a high number of ceasefire violations [1] in Donetsk region, although lower than the level observed the previous day. Whilst in “DPR”-controlled Donetsk city centre, the SMM heard during the night 105 undetermined explosions 3-12km west, west-north-west, north-west and north-north-west of its position. Positioned in “DPR”-controlled Yasynuvata (16km north-east of Donetsk), the SMM during daytime heard 113 undetermined explosions and 46 single shots of small-arms fire 2-10km west and south-west of its position. Whilst in government-controlled Avdiivka (17km north of Donetsk), the SMM heard 160 undetermined explosions assessed as caused by 120mm and 82mm mortar, and automatic grenade launcher rounds, in addition to heavy-machine-gun and small-arms fire, mostly at locations 2-10km south-east of its position. In addition, the SMM between 15:08-17:54 heard 63 explosions (of which 34 impacts and 29 undetermined) assessed as caused by rounds of152mm artillery, and four impacts from 122mm artillery, 4-10km south-east of its position.
The SMM observed more ceasefire violations in Luhansk region compared to the previous day, but none during the daytime. Whilst in government-controlled parts of Stanytsia Luhanska (16km north-east of Luhansk), the SMM heard, within only a couple of hours around midnight 336 undetermined explosions assessed as caused by mortar, anti-aircraft gun, automatic grenade launcher, and recoilless gun (73mm) rounds, in addition to heavy machine-gun and small-arms fire, 3-8km south-east, south and south-west of its location.
The SMM followed up on reports of alleged shelling in “DPR”-controlled Yasne (30km south-west of Donetsk). The SMM observed broken widows, scarring on walls and buildings, and holes in roofs. The SMM analysed seven craters in the ground, one impact on the roof of a house, one impact in the roof of a barn, one impact on the south-west facing side of a house-garage, and one impact on the south-west facing wall of a building, and assessed them as caused by automatic grenade launcher fired from a south-westerly direction. Residents told the SMM that shelling had taken place on 29 May between 20:30-21:30. The SMM noted a house with recent damage: broken windows on two floors, a punctured metal roof and metal debris on the ground, all on its south-western side. A neighbouring house had its terrace impacted in several places, and several windows broken, also all on the south-western side.
In government-controlled parts of Stanytsia Luhanska (16km north-east of Luhansk), the SMM observed more than ten fresh craters, most of which it assessed as having been caused by automatic grenade launcher fire. The SMM also saw shell debris of recoilless guns (SPG-9, 73mm) and cannon (BMP-1, 73mm). The SMM conducted crater analysis of one of the craters, and assessed the fire to have originated from a northerly direction. The local commander of the Ukrainian Armed Forces checkpoint at the Stanytsia Luhanska bridge told the SMM that from 22:30 on 30 May to 01:00 on 31 May his staff had observed firing from different types of weapons. An SMM unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) spotted hundreds of fresh craters every six-seven meters on one slope in the vicinity of “LPR” positions and more than ten fresh craters at the northern base of the Prince Ihor monument.
The SMM continued to monitor the withdrawal of heavy weapons foreseen in the Minsk Package of Measures. The SMM has yet to receive the full information requested in the 16 October 2015 notification. The SMM revisited locations known to the SMM as heavy weapons holding areas, even though they do not comply with the specific criteria set out for permanent storage sites in the notification.
In government-controlled areas beyond the respective withdrawal lines, Ukrainian Armed Forces soldiers did not allow the SMM access to three such locations*.
In “DPR”-controlled areas beyond the respective withdrawal lines, the SMM revisited such locations and observed eight self-propelled howitzers (2S1 Gvozdika, 122mm), eight towed howitzers (six 2A65, Msta-B, 152mm and two D-30, 122mm).
The SMM observed the presence of armoured combat vehicles and an anti-aircraft weapon in the security zone. In government-controlled areas, the SMM observed two armoured personnel carriers (APC; BTR-4 and BTR-70) near Popasna (69km west of Luhansk); one armoured combat vehicle (ACV; BRDM) in Novozvanivka (71km west of Luhansk); one ACV (BRDM-2) near government-controlled Shchastia (20km north of Luhansk); one APC (BTR-70) between Peredilske (24km north-west of Luhansk) and Staryi Aidar (20km north-west of Luhansk); and one anti-aircraft gun (ZU-23) in Marinka (23km south-west of Donetsk).
The SMM continued to monitor the presence of mines and unexploded ordnance along the contact line. Whilst in Rozsypne (“DPR”-controlled 60km north-east of Donetsk), the SMM observed a piece of unexploded ordnance (UXO) stuck in the ground in the garden of an abandoned house (from a distance it appeared to be a 300mm Smerch rocket), close to an area populated by families with small children. The Russian Federation officer at the Joint Centre for Control and Co-ordination (JCCC) told the SMM that the “DPR” “ministry of emergency situations” had been informed about the presence of the UXO. Three residents (two men in their mid-sixties, one woman aged 50) confirmed that the “DPR” “ministry of emergency services” had come to the location around 18 May and had attempted to remove the UXO with a tractor and cable; however, they added, the cable had broken and the removal was postponed.
Whilst in “LPR”-controlled Kalynove (58km west of Luhansk), the SMM observed two unexploded multiple launch rocket systems (BM-21 Grad, 122mm) rockets (lying flat, had not protruded the ground) on top of a hill south-west of Kalynove. The SMM was unable to assess exactly how long the rockets had been there, but could assess that it was longer than a few months. Two residents (men in their fifties) told the SMM they found the rockets in March 2016. Some 450m away, the SMM observed one 120mm or 122mm artillery shell. The same interlocutors said it had likely landed in March 2015. Based on its position, the SMM assessed that the shell had originated from a north-westerly direction.
Whilst in “LPR”-controlled Zolote-5 (60km west of Luhansk), the SMM observed at an “LPR” checkpoint 12 anti-tank mines laid across the road on two wooden planks.
The SMM continued to facilitate and monitor adherence to the ceasefire to enable repairs to essential infrastructure. The SMM continued to monitor the repair of gas pipelines between government-controlled Marinka (23km south-west of Donetsk) and “DPR”-controlled Oleksandrivka (20km south-west of Donetsk). The SMM was forced to withdraw from the area and work was suspended because of sporadic ceasefire violations in the vicinity, however 70 meters of pipeline were laid during the day.
The SMM continued to monitor long queues at crossing routes near the contact line. At two Ukrainian Armed Forces checkpoint on H15 near Marinka (23km south-west of Donetsk), the SMM observed in the morning of 30 May a total of: 217 cars, ten mini buses, five buses, and approximately 300 pedestrians queuing to travel west; and 76 vehicles, two buses and no pedestrians queuing to travel east. In the afternoon, at the same checkpoints, eight cars were queuing to travel west, and 30 cars and two buses queuing to travel east. On 31 May in the afternoon, at the same two checkpoints, the SMM observed 163 cars, one bus and one commercial truck queuing towards government-controlled areas; and 100 cars (including five vans), three buses and one truck heading in the opposite direction.
Whilst at the government-controlled checkpoint near Stanytsia Luhanska bridge, the SMM observed 400 people waiting to walk towards government-controlled areas, and approximately 150 people waiting to cross in the opposite direction. At the “LPR” checkpoint south of Stanytsia Luhanska bridge, the SMM observed around 30 pedestrians waiting to walk towards government-controlled areas, and no one waiting to enter in the opposite direction. On the government controlled side of the bridge, approximately 150 people were waiting to walk across the bridge towards “LPR”-controlled areas. In the afternoon, the SMM observed no queue at the “LPR” checkpoint.
The SMM monitored one area alongside the border with the Russian Federation outside government control. At the Uspenka (73km south-east of Donetsk) border crossing point, the SMM observed 42 civilian cars (six with Russian Federation licence plates, five with a “DPR” sticker glued over Ukrainian licence plates, and the rest with Ukrainian licence plates) and 14 commercial trucks (eight with Ukrainian, two with Russian Federation and two with Belarusian licence plates) queuing to leave Ukraine. A group of five men (in their thirties) in the queue told the SMM that under normal conditions it could take an hour to pass the checkpoint, but on one occasion they had experienced waiting times of between 12 and 24 hours.
The SMM monitored three protests in front of the Lviv regional council: against privatisation of the premises of a sports club (25 participants); for the regional council to recognize members of volunteer battalions as Anti-Terrorism Operation participants (50 participants); and for increased pensions for police officers (30 participants). Police was present at all the events, which passed off peacefully.
The SMM continued to monitor the situation in Kherson, Odessa, Ivano-Frankivsk, Kharkiv, Dnepropetrovsk, Chernivtsi and Kyiv.
*Restrictions to SMM’s freedom of movement or other impediments to the fulfilment of its mandate
The SMM’s monitoring is restrained by security hazards and threats, including risks posed by mines and unexploded ordnance, and by restrictions of its freedom of movement and other impediments – which vary from day to day. The SMM’s mandate provides for safe and secure access throughout Ukraine. All signatories of the Package of Measures have agreed on the need for this safe and secure access, that restriction of the SMM’s freedom of movement constitutes a violation, and on the need for rapid response to these violations.
Whilst in “DPR”-controlled Yasynuvata, the SMM observed a building flying three flags, “DPR”, “Novorossia” and “Vostok battalion”, was fenced with a three-metre tall concrete and metal fence. An armed “DPR” member inside the fence noticed the SMM, pulled up an AK-74 rifle and pointed it at the SMM, driving slowly past. The SMM left the location immediately.
“DPR” members did not allow the SMM to access a military compound in Telmanove (67km south of Donetsk). The SMM informed the JCCC.
“DPR” members did not allow the SMM to access a second military compound in Telmanove (67km south of Donetsk). The SMM informed the JCCC.
Armed “DPR” members did not allow the SMM to enter the village of Mykolaivka (40km north-east of Mariupol), citing orders from their commander not to let anyone enter the village. The SMM informed the JCCC.
Armed “DPR” members did not allow the SMM to pass their checkpoint in Lukove (41km north-east of Mariupol). They requested the SMM to immediately leave the area. The SMM informed the JCCC.
Ukrainian Armed Forces soldiers denied the SMM access to three heavy weapons holding areas. The SMM informed the JCCC.
Armed “DPR” members continue to keep the power supply to SMM’s repeater in Donetsk city disconnected as they have been since 20 May. As a result, SMM remote monitoring equipment at “DPR”-controlled Oktiabr mine and in government-controlled Avdiivka are disabled (see SMM Daily Report 21 May 2016).
Armed “DPR” members prevented the SMM from proceeding to a location west of “DPR”-controlled Ozerianivka (35km north-east of Donetsk). The SMM had intended to launch a mid-range UAV in an effort to locate an SMM long-range UAV that had been downed in the area (see SMM Spot Report: SMM unmanned aerial vehicle downed near Horlivka, 27 May 2016).
Ukrainian Armed Forces soldiers did initially not allow the SMM access to a heavy weapons holding area, however the SMM informed the JCCC and was allowed access after 20 minutes.
[1] Please see the annexed table for a complete breakdown of the ceasefire violations as well as map of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions marked with locations featured in this report.