Former White House Press Secretary claims she covered after Bill appeared with a scratch following a row with his wife
Hillary Clinton has already built reputation as a fearsome opponent in the political ring as she ramps up her campaign for the presidential election.
But a new book claims that it is not only the Republicans who fear the former First Lady.
Just as Hillary attempts to present her softer side to the nation's electorate, political consultant Roger Stone has alleged that the Democrat front-runner is 'prone to violent outbursts towards her husband and terrorizes her staff and Secret Service agents.'
Hillary Clinton did not respond to requests for a comment when approached by the Daily Mail.
Political consultant Roger Stone has alleged that Democrat front-runner Hillary Clinton is 'prone to violent outbursts towards her husband and terrorizes her staff and Secret Service agents' (file picture)
The Clintons' War On Women, out later this month, claims that Hillary has 'beaten Bill, hit him with hard objects, scratched and clawed him, and made him bleed,' reported the New York Daily News.
The book sets out to explore the conspiracy theories and rumors surrounding the Clinton's - dating right back to Bill's days as a governor in Arkansas.
Yet Stone, who claims he played a key role in the election of Republican presidents from Richard Nixon to Ronald Reagan to the Bushes, says Hillary's 'long history of domestic abuse' is already well documented.
Former White House Press Secretary Dee Dee Myers had made allegations about Hillary's temper in Gail Sheehy's infamous 1999 book, Hillary's Choice.
She claimed that she had covered for the Democrat when Bill Clinton was spotted with a bad scratch on his neck following a blazing row with his wife after he entertained Barbara Streisand at the White House, reported New York Daily News.
'I'm the idiot who said he'd cut himself shaving before I'd seen him,' Myers told Sheehy. 'Then I saw him — it was a big scratch, clearly not a shaving cut.'
The Clintons' War On Women, out later this month, claims that Hillary has 'beaten Bill, hit him with hard objects, scratched and clawed him, and made him bleed' (file picture)
The Clintons' War On Women (left) out later this month, claims that Hillary has 'beaten Bill, hit him with hard objects, scratched and clawed him, and made him bleed.' While Christopher Andersen's American Evita: Hillary Clinton's Path to Power (right) said that 'In the past, Hillary had thrown books and an ashtray at the president'
She also claimed that Clinton would become angry when people tried to disagree with her and would hold a vindictive grudge.
'The President didn't really attack people personally, Mrs. Clinton sometimes did....not only would she humiliate you in front of your colleagues or whoever happened to be around, Hillary tended to kind of run a campaign against people behind their back and that was certainly my experience,' reported New Buster.
At the height of the Monica Lewinsky scandal, staff overheard another of Hillary's alleged violent outbursts against her husband, according to another book.
'You stupid, stupid, stupid bastard,' Hillary shouted, wrote Christopher Andersen in American Evita: Hillary Clinton's Path to Power.
'In the past, Hillary had thrown books and an ashtray at the president — both hitting their mark . . . Hillary slapped him across the face — hard enough to leave a red mark that would be clearly visible to Secret Service agents when he left the room.
The book, which claims to be based on accounts by those close the Clintons, also describes Hillary throwing things at her husband during limo rides.
One of their drivers alleged that she would throw: 'Yellow legal pads, files, briefing books, car keys...'
American Evita: Hillary Clinton's Path to Power also describes Hillary throwing things at her husband during limo rides (file picture)
But the driver said that by the time the limo arrived, the couple (pictured walking their dogs in Long Island) were 'all smiles and waving for the crowd'
The driver said they would having blazing, screaming rows on the drive but by the time they arrived, it was 'all smiles and waving for the crowd.'
Andersen also describes the aftermath of one of their fights where staff members said they found: 'broken glass, smashed dishes and a cupboard door ripped off its hinges.'
'Stay the f**k away from me! Just f*****g do as I say!!!' she is quoted as saying to an agent who refused to carry her luggage in the book Unlimited Access by FBI agent Gary Aldridge.
Compared to Hillary's salty language, Bill Clinton was a gentleman, according to now-retired Secret Service agent, Dan Emmett, who began covering President Clinton on his first day in office in January 1993 and writes about guarding the president in a new version of his book Within Arm's Length, published by St. Martin's Press
Emmett launched said the ex-First Lady Hillary Clinton was aloof, and told how Hillary never said 'thank you' to agents, unlike her husband, Bill, and their daughter, Chelsea and treated the Secret Service agents like 'hired help', he said.
In the new book, Emmett tells of one stormy night, St Valentine's Day in 1994 to be precise, when Bill and Chelsea had him accompany them to Andrews Air Force Base to surprise Hillary, returning from a trip.
Although Bill and Chelsea thanked him for the effort, Hillary did not.
It appears the Democratic front-runner is attempting to make over her fearsome image in the run up to the presidential campaign.
Stone, who claims he played a key role in the election of Republican presidents from Richard Nixon to Ronald Reagan to the Bushes, says Hillary's 'long history of domestic abuse' against Bill is already well documented
It appears the Democratic (pictured with Bill and their granddaughter Charlotte last year) is attempting to make over her fearsome image in the run up to the presidential campaign
In journalist Ed Klein's new book, Unlikeable, he claims that Hillary sought advice from none other than Steven Spielberg on 'how to be more likeable.'
Supposedly on her husband's recommendations to present herself 'as a strong but loveable older woman – more Golda [Meir] than Maggie [Thatcher]' for 2016, she snapped back: 'I'm not going to pretend to be somebody I'm not.'
But it appears as though she has heeded his advice, allegedly agreeing to work on her facial expressions with an acting coach in front of a camera and watch them back - until, that was, her temper flared and she knocked the camera off its tripod, reported The Telegraph.
Hillary made another attempt to shake off her 'unlikable' tag during an appearance on Saturday Night Live.
The former secretary of state showed her softer side when she played a sympathetic barkeep named 'Val' opposite impersonator Kate McKinnon's Hillary Clinton.
Clinton joked with McKinnon and even put on an impression of her own.
Taking a swipe at her Republican candidate, she said: 'Donald Trump? Isn't he the one that's like 'Ugh, you're all losers,' NBC reported.
Hillary may be working hard to update her image but Stone, who recently decamped from Trump's campaign, told the New York Daily Post: 'There's only one Hillary Clinton: she's the Ice Queen,' he says. 'That's the real Hillary. The one you see in her campaign — that's the fake.'
The Clintons' War on Women, published by Skyhorse, is out on October 13. The book also promises to reveal 'the couple's deeply personal violations of the people they crushed in their obsessive quest for power.'