The endurance towards criticism is crucial in any endeavor. To avoid criticism, one should do nothing, say nothing, and be nothing.
Klaas Van Praet in response to a news article on IOTA titled, “IOTA publishes year in review for 2019 and year in preview for 2020” commented “The IOTA community was happy* about the communication and everyone who wants to bash on IOTA uses it as a big issue while it’s not. The Coordinator isn’t a bottleneck and issues snapshots. It has nothing to do with getting your transactions verified.”
Stephanahpets wanted to clarify the bad spots in the IOTA article stating, “A DAG is not a hashing algorithm. Your interpretation of the IOTA stoppage” is undefined, there is no common understanding of the definition, and you mention that the network did continue working, albeit for zero-value transactions only. The Bug wasn’t related to an “upgrade called Coordicide.”
About three days ago, Laziegoblin responded, “Who’s CC? Don’t get too annoyed by anyone bashing IOTA. As long as you see the IF and everyone involved handle it with this level of professionalism, it’s only a positive thing. Bugs and errors allow for improvements :)”
IOTA Community and the Foundation are well aware that criticism and misinterpretation of technology and facts is part and parcel in any endeavor. However, they do not want to ignore criticism, and they want to ensure that they level the situation by giving a true facet of reality.
IOTA has fixed the Bug, and they are forward-looking on their mission concerning events, news, roadmap, release, update, fork, conference, partnership, airdrop, and more.
Transiting to 2020 IOTA projects yet in the research phase are Coordicide, Spam prevention, and detection, Automatic Peer Discovery, Economic Incentives, Consensus Algorithm Spec, Cryptography Spec, Attack Analysis.
The Engineering projects under active development are about the HUB, IRI, Coo-free IRI, Qubic, Trinity, Local Snapshots and Permanodes, C Client, and MAM+. The list further includes Tanglescope, PoWBox, iota.lib.js, and Curl+.
IOTA continues to progress in all verticals, whether about eHealth, smart energy, Industrial IoT, Global Trade and Supply Chains, and mobility, and automotive. IOTA is for organizations and developers and as well for regulators and policymakers.
IOTA continues to focus on being “useful for the emerging m2m economy of Internet-of-Things (IoT), data integrity, micro-/nano- payments, and anywhere else, a scalable decentralized system is warranted.”