Euro 2016 Jury hears of the alleged threats and behaviour
Is Isco the third party involved? / Come to my house, we'll show the girls who's boss / Aduriz: We are not going to talk at all about De Gea
Spanish national team footballers David de Gea and Iker Muniain have both been implicated in the ongoing case against pornography entrepreneur Ignacio Allende Fernandez, better known as Torbe.
A witness in the case - in which Torbe is accused of human trafficking for purposes of sexual exploitation, sexual assault, child pornography, prostitution, extortion and money laundering - has testified that she was abused by Muniain, after De Gea arranged the meeting, which was said to be between her, Muniain and another player, who at first was thought to be Isco but has yet to be revealed.
Muniain is alleged to have had sex with the woman in 2012, while De Gea is alleged to have arranged the meeting, though he wasn't physically present.
According to eldiario.es, the arm of the national police force tasked with such matters has attributed a "high degree of credibility" to the women's testimony, and to those of two other women.
They have also ruled out the possibility of "motives existing to discredit those denounced for economic or personal reasons".
The victim's statement, made in front of agents, details a number of instances of harassment by the Torbe network, including an incident involving the Manchester United and Athletic Club players in a five-star Madrid hotel in 2012.
Torbe was alleged to have promised her a lot of money to go the hotel suite, where one other woman and two footballers would be.
"Both the other girl, as well as TP3 [the codename given to the protected witness] were sexually assaulted by the men, as they were physically assaulted by both if they refused," the police report said.
"After finishing with the sexual desires of these footballers, they made threats so that what happened in that hotel room would never come to light."
It was also revealed that the two women were never paid the amount promised to them, with all the money going to Torbe.
"Neither TP3 nor the other woman that was in the room earned anything for the physical and sexual aggression they received."
In a subsequent hearing, the witness finally named the footballers as Iker Muniain and another U21 national team player, and that David de Gea had arranged the evening through Torbe.