A June, 2019 research paper concludes that human activity can account for no more than a 0.01C rise in global temperatures, and goes so far as to “prove” low-level clouds “practically control the global temperature”.
The paper, entitled “No Experimental Evidence for the Significant Anthropogenic Climate Change“ and published in Nature, is the work of a group Finnish scientists. It explains how the IPCC’s analysis of global temperatures suffers from at least one glaring error — namely, the failure to account for “influences of low cloud cover” on global temperatures.
In this paper we will prove that GCM-models used in IPCC report AR5 fail to calculate the influences of the low cloud cover changes on the global temperature. That is why those models give a very small natural temperature change leaving a very large change for the contribution of the green house gases in the observed temperature. This is the reason why IPCC has to use a very large sensitivity to compensate a too small natural component. Further they have to leave out the strong negative feedback due to the clouds in order to magnify the sensitivity. In addition, this paper proves that the changes in the low cloud cover fraction practically control the global temperature.
But its conclusion is revealed in the below chart (lifted from the paper):
It confirms what we’ve been saying all along, that cloud cover controls earth’s climate while the Sun (effectively) controls cloud cover — whether that be directly by an influx Cosmic Rays nucleating clouds under low solar activity (Svensmark) or indirectly by that same influx triggering large volcanic eruptions (Ebisuzaki) emitting particulates into the stratosphere.
That quote from Roy Spencer PhD. again rings true:
“Clouds are the Earth’s sunshade, and if cloud cover changes for any reason, you have global warming — or global cooling.”
This theory was recently further supported by researchers at Kobe University in Japan who published a paper rather innocuously titled,“Intensified East Asian Winter Monsoon during the last Geomagnetic Reversal Transition“. But, as Robert Felix writes, that title belies its importance.
The press release (see link below) explains that Cosmic Rays increased “dramatically” during the Matuyama–Brunhes magnetic reversal of 780,000 years ago. Such an increase (called the Svensmark Effect) could induce more low cloud formation and influence the Earth’s climate via the umbrella effect.
The Kobe paper explains how the IPCC’s climate models wildly overestimate the influence of carbon dioxide on global temperatures and ignore cloud cover:
…the [IPCC] models fail to derive the influences of low cloud cover fraction on the global temperature. A too small natural component results in a too large portion for the contribution of the greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide. That is why J. KAUPPINEN AND P. MALMI IPCC represents the climate sensitivity more than one order of magnitude larger than our sensitivity 0.24°C. Because the anthropogenic portion in the increased CO2 is less than 10%, we have practically no anthropogenic climate change. The low clouds control mainly the global temperature.
Earth is at the early stages of suffering from both a Grand Solar Minimum AND a magnetic excursion/reversal.
These two independent factors occurring simultaneously are a double-whammy — each can drastically reduces Earth’s magnetic field (down to 10% of full-strength) which allows more Cosmic Rays to bombard our atmosphere which in turn nucleate more clouds and also heat the muons in silica-rich magma sending volcanoes-a-popping.
The upshot of each of these factors is global cooling.
NASA is attempting to paint the upcoming Grand Solar Minimum as a window of opportunity for space missions, “the improving ability to make such predictions about space weather are good news for mission planners who can schedule human exploration missions during periods of lower radiation.”
However this is absurd, and serves as yet another example of government obfuscation and half-truths.
NASA is effectively forecasting a return to the Dalton Minimum (1790-1830) but gives no mention of the brutal cold, crop loss, famine, war and powerful Volcanic eruptions associated with it:
The COLD TIMES are returning in line with historically low solar activity, cloud-nucleating Cosmic Rays, and a meridional jet stream flow.
Prepare accordingly — learn the facts, relocate if need be, and grow your own.
Social Media channels are restricting Electroverse’s reach; Twitter are purging followers, and Facebook are labeling posts as “false” — be sure to subscribe to receive new post notifications by email (the box is located in the sidebar >>> or scroll down if on mobile).
Any way you can, help us spread the message so others can survive and thrive in the coming times.
