Ricky Gervais skewered 'woke' Hollywood, made jokes about Jeffrey Epstien, Harvey Weinstein and Prince Andrew, and tackled topics such as MeToo and ISIS as he left his A-list audience wincing during his opening monologue at the 77th Golden Globe awards.
Tom Hanks, Robert De Niro, and Gwyneth Paltrow were left with stunned looks on their faces as Gervais mocked Felicity Huffman over the college admission scandal, branded James Corden a 'massive p****' and ripped Judi Dench for 'licking' her own private parts in his eight-minute speech.
In a particularly blunt moment, Gervais advised those receiving awards to avoid making political speeches because 'you're in no position to the public about anything' before adding: 'If you win, come up, accept your little award, thank your agent, and your God and f*** off.'
The British comic, hosting for the fifth time, underlined his point by jesting: 'You say you're woke but the companies you work for in China — unbelievable. Apple, Amazon, Disney. If ISIS started a streaming service you'd call your agent, wouldn't you?'
Social media lit up with posts praising Gervais's take-downs of the Hollywood establishment, relishing in the uncomfortable reactions from those in the room. - though others found his jokes hard to stomach.
Piers Morgan congratulated the comedian on his 'finest 8 minutes' but a review of the night in the Chicago Sun-Times said Gervais was 'so intent on congratulating himself for being edgy' that he 'forgot to be funny'.
Following the controversy were the awards themselves - which saw Sam Mendes win best director for 1917, which also won best film. Renée Zellweger and Joaquin Phoenix scooped the best actress and actor awards for Judy and Joker, while Once Upon a Time in Hollywood won in the best picture - musical or comedy category.
Back for more: It is the fifth time the 58-year-old comedian has emceed the gala as he has done previously from 2010 to 2012 and once again in 2016 (pictured)
Tom Hank (left), sitting next to his wife Rita Wilson, looked shocked as Gervias' dropped several eyebrow raising jokes during his opening monologue
Gwyneth Paltrow reacts with shock as Rick Gervais delivers his eviscerating opening monologue at the Golden Globes
Robert De Niro (left) and Martin Scorsese (right) at the Golden Globes awards, where Gervais poked fun at their latest film The Irishman for being three hours long
Gervais poked fun at Leonardo DiCaprio (pictured) in a long running joke that the Academy Award winner dates younger women
Piers Morgan was among those heaping praise on Ricky Gervais following his Golden Globes speech, in which he let rip at the Hollywood establishment and 'woke' culture
Fans and foes alike praised Gervais for daring to call out hypocritical Hollywood stars who advocate for equal rights, while working for corporations with checkered records and producers such as Harvey Weinstein
In one moment which shocked the stars in the crowd, Gervais makes a pointed remark about the death of pedophile billionaire Jeffrey Epstein.
He said: '[Netflix series Afterlife] is a show about a man who wants to kill himself .... Spoiler alert, season two is on the way so he didn't kill himself...just like Jeffrey Epstein.'
As the audience gasped, he doubled down on the remarks, saying: 'Shut up. I know he's your friend, but I don't care.'
Ricky Gervais's most controversial Golden Globes jokes You say you're woke but the companies you work for in China — unbelievable. Apple, Amazon, Disney. If ISIS started a streaming service you'd call your agent, wouldn't you?
Once Upon a Time In Hollywood – nearly three hours long. Leonardo DiCaprio attended the premiere and by the end his date was too old for him. Even Prince Andrew is like 'come on Leo, mate'
I came in a limo tonight and the license plate was made by Felicity Huffman
[Afterlife] is a show about a man who wants to kill himself because his wife died of cancer and it's still more fun than this. Spoiler alert, season two is on the way so he didn't kill himself...just like Jeffrey Epstein. I know he's your friend, I don't care
[Birdbox is] a movie where people survive by acting like they don't see a thing. Sort of like working for Harvey Weinstein
It was a big year for pedophile movies. Surviving R Kelly, Leaving Neverland, Two Popes
The world got to see James Corden as a fat p****. He was also in the movie Cats, but nobody saw that
Dame Judi Dench defended [Cats] saying it was the role she was born to play because she loves nothing better than plunking herself down on the carpet, lifting her leg and licking her [expletive]
You're in no position to lecture the public about anything. You know nothing about the real world. Most of you spent less time in school than Greta Thunberg Advertisement
Epstein was found dead in his cell at the Metropolitan Correctional Center, New York, in August while awaiting trial on numerous sex offences. An autopsy found he had hanged himself.
Gervais also slammed hypocrite Hollywood stars for working for companies with controversial rights records while claiming to be 'woke', and warned winners against making political acceptance speeches.
He blasted: 'You say you're woke, but the companies you work for are unbelievable. Apple, Amazon, Disney - If ISIS started a streaming service you'd call your agent wouldn't you.
'So if you do win an award tonight don't use it as a platform to make a political speech. You're in no position to lecture the public about anything.
'You know nothing about the real world. Most of you spent less time in school than Greta Thunberg.
'So if you win, come up, accept your little award, thank your agent and your god and then f**k off.'
He also claimed that Apple, who began their streaming site in 2019, used 'sweatshops' to make their products, as owner Tim Cook watched from the crowd.
Gervais, 58, also took aim at specific people including actress Felicity Huffman who was jailed over her role in the college admissions scandal this year.
'You came here in your limos. I came in a limo tonight and the license plate was made by Felicity Huffman,' he continued, as the cameras panned to a shocked crowd.
Huffman recently completed an 11-day stint in jail after she pleaded guilty to paying $15,000 to get one of her daughters into college.
Gervais continued: 'It's her daughter I feel sorry for. That must be the most embarrassing thing to happen to her, and her dad was in Wild Hogs.'
Several audience members broke out into shocked laughter, with Tom Hanks looking stunned.
Gervais, who has not hosted in the #MeToo era before, took a shot there too.
He said there was a wide variety of stars in the room, and they all have one thing in common: 'They´re all afraid of Ronan Farrow,' Gervais said.
New Yorker writer Farrow played a key role in outing sexual misconductin Hollywood and exposing disgraced producer Harvey Weinstein.
Not everyone was a fan of Gervais's jokes, however, with many accusing him of misjudging the tone or going too far
Cate Blanchett (center) barely kept it together after Gervais' mentioned Jeffrey Epstein's apparent suicide during his monologue
Amy Poehler (left) looked wide-eyed at the camera during Gervais' surprising and crude opening monologue on Sunday night, while Chris Evans (right) was spotted laughing along
Pictured: Ricky Gervais (left) and his partner Jane Fallon (right) on the Golden Globes' red carper on Sunday
Celebrities including Tom Hanks and Margot Robbie (bottom right), Ellen Degeneres and wife Portia de Rossi (bottom left), Helen Mirren and Pierce Brosnan (centre right), Jennifer Lopez and Joaquin Phoenix (top left)
Beyonce and Jay-Z mingle with other celebrities at the 77th Golden Globe Awards at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on Sunday
Taron Egerton (right), who won the Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy for his portrayal of Elton John (left), in Rocketman, celebrates alongside the singer who won his own award for Best Original Song
Ellen DeGeneres and wife Portia de Rossi share a kiss during celebrations at the 77th Golden Globe Awards
Later in the show, Gervais introduced a clip for the film Birdbox, describing it as 'a movie where people survive by acting like they don't see a thing. Sort of like working for Harvey Weinstein.'
Gervais also mocked what he described as 'pedophile movies.'
'Taking of all you perverts, it was a big year for pedophile movies. Surviving R Kelly, Leaving Neverland, Two Popes,' he says, before breaking down at his own joke.
'Shut up,' he told the stunned crowd, 'I don't care.'
He then turned to Academy Award winner Leonardo DiCaprio to poke fun at the age gap between him and the women he dates.
He said: 'Once Upon a Time In Hollywood [is] nearly three hours long. Leonardo DiCaprio attended the premiere and by the end his date was too old for him.'
Cameras caught Leo's reaction. It seemed the actor - who is currently dating 22-year-old Camila Morrone - was able to poke fun at himself, blushing and smiling while the rest of the room cracked up.
Amid laughter from the star-studded audience, Gervais added: 'Even Prince Andrew is like, ''come on Leo mate, you're nearly 50, son''.'
The Duke of York has faced intense public scrutiny over his relationship with convicted pedophile Epstein.
Andrew, 59, strenuously denies having sex with the financier's 'sex slave' Virginia Roberts and claims he can't remember meeting her despite a photograph of him with his arm around her.
Gervais set his sights on James Corden, who recently took part in the poorly reviewed movie Cats.
Quentin Tarantino, whose film Once Upon A Time In Hollywood won the Best Comedy or Musical award, speaks with star Margot Robbie during the award ceremony
Tom Hanks takes to the stage as he is given the Cecil B deMille Award, recognising his lifetime achievements in cinema
Quentin Tarantino, Jason Momoa, Lisa Bonet, Tom Rothman, and Saoirse Ronan at the 77th Annual Golden Globe Awards
Charlize Theron at the 77th Annual Golden Globe Awards held at the Beverly Hilton Hotel
Joaquin Phoenix (bottom left), who won the Best Actor award for Joker, sits alongside the likes of Todd Phillips, Rooney Mara, Cynthia Erivo, and Tim Allen during the ceremony
Nicole Avant, Jane Fallon, Ricky Gervais and Netflix Chief Content Officer Ted Sarandos attend the Netflix 2020 Golden Globes After Party
Ted Sarandos, Aziz Ansari, Alan Yang, Ricky Gervais and Lena Waithe during the Golden Globes After Party
'I don't care anymore!' Read Ricky Gervais's Golden Globes opening monologue in full Ricky Gervais took aim at some of Hollywood's biggest egos as he hosted the Golden Globes for the fifth time Hello and welcome to the 77th annual Golden Globe Awards, live from the Beverly Hilton Hotel here in Los Angeles. I'm Ricky Gervais, thank you. You'll be pleased to know this is the last time I'm hosting these awards, so I don't care anymore. I'm joking. I never did. I'm joking, I never did. NBC clearly don't care either — fifth time. I mean, Kevin Hart was fired from the Oscars for some offensive tweets — hello? Lucky for me, the Hollywood Foreign Press can barely speak English and they've no idea what Twitter is, so I got offered this gig by fax. Let's go out with a bang, let's have a laugh at your expense. Remember, they're just jokes. We're all gonna die soon and there's no sequel, so remember that. But you all look lovely all dolled up. You came here in your limos. I came here in a limo tonight and the license plate was made by Felicity Huffman. No, shush. It's her daughter I feel sorry for. OK? That must be the most embarrassing thing that's ever happened to her. And her dad was in Wild Hogs. Lots of big celebrities here tonight. Legends. Icons. This table alone — Al Pacino, Robert DeNiro … Baby Yoda. Oh, that's Joe Pesci, sorry. I love you man. Don't have me whacked. But tonight isn't just about the people in front of the camera. In this room are some of the most important TV and film executives in the world. People from every background. They all have one thing in common: They're all terrified of Ronan Farrow. He's coming for ya. Talking of all you perverts, it was a big year for pedophile movies. Surviving R. Kelly, Leaving Neverland, Two Popes. Shut up. Shut up. I don't care. I don't care. Many talented people of color were snubbed in major categories. Unfortunately, there's nothing we can do about that. Hollywood Foreign press are all very racist. Fifth time. So. We were going to do an In-Memoriam this year, but when I saw the list of people who died, it wasn't diverse enough. No, it was mostly white people and I thought, nah, not on my watch. Maybe next year. Let's see what happens. No one cares about movies anymore. No one goes to cinema, no one really watches network TV.Everyone is watching Netflix. This show should just be me coming out, going, 'Well done Netflix. You win everything. Good night.' But no, we got to drag it out for three hours. You could binge-watch the entire first season of Afterlife instead of watching this show. That's a show about a man who wants to kill himself cause his wife dies of cancer and it's still more fun than this. Spoiler alert, season two is on the way so in the end he obviously didn't kill himself. Just like Jeffrey Epstein. Shut up. I know he's your friend but I don't care. Many of the guests packed into the Beverly Hilton Hotel for the award ceremony found themselves as the butt of Gervais's jokes Seriously, most films are awful. Lazy. Remakes, sequels. I've heard a rumor there might be a sequel to Sophie's Choice. I mean, that would just be Meryl just going, 'Well, it's gotta be this one then.' All the best actors have jumped to Netflix, HBO. And the actors who just do Hollywood movies now do fantasy-adventure nonsense. They wear masks and capes and really tight costumes. Their job isn't acting anymore. It's going to the gym twice a day and taking steroids, really. Have we got an award for most ripped junky? No point, we'd know who'd win that. Martin Scorsese made the news for his controversial comments about the Marvel franchise. He said they're not real cinema and they remind him about theme parks. I agree. Although I don't know what he's doing hanging around theme parks. He's not big enough to go on the rides. He's tiny. The Irishman was amazing. It was amazing. It was great. Long, but amazing. It wasn't the only epic movie. Once Upon a Time in Hollywood, nearly three hours long. Leonardo DiCaprio attended the premiere and by the end his date was too old for him. Even Prince Andrew was like, 'Come on, Leo, mate.You're nearly 50-something.' The world got to see James Corden as a fat p****. He was also in the movie Cats. No one saw that movie. And the reviews, shocking. I saw one that said, 'This is the worst thing to happen to cats since dogs.' But Dame Judi Dench defended the film saying it was the role she was born to play because she loves nothing better than plunking herself down on the carpet, lifting her leg and licking her [expletive]. (Coughs) Hairball. She's old-school. It's the last time, who cares? Apple roared into the TV game with The Morning Show, a superb drama about the importance of dignity and doing the right thing, made by a company that runs sweatshops in China. Well, you say you're woke but the companies you work for in China — unbelievable. Apple, Amazon, Disney. If ISIS started a streaming service you'd call your agent, wouldn't you? So if you do win an award tonight, don't use it as a platform to make a political speech. You're in no position to lecture the public about anything. You know nothing about the real world. Most of you spent less time in school than Greta Thunberg. So if you win, come up, accept your little award, thank your agent, and your God and f*** off, OK? It's already three hours long. Right, let's do the first award. Brad Pitt watches on as Gervais pokes fun at his Once Upon A Time In Hollywood co-star Leonardo DiCaprio for dating younger women Advertisement
'The world got to see James Corden as a fat p****. He was also in the movie Cats, but no one saw that.'
Critics and audience alike have mocked the musical-turned-movie. It has received a 21 per cent Rotten Tomato score and inspiring thousands of ridiculing memes despite the all-star cast.
Gervais continued with an expletive filled joke about Judi Dench, who also starred in the panned movie.
'Dame Judi Dench defended the film saying it was the role she was born to play because she loves nothing better than plunking herself down on the carpet, lifting her leg and licking' her private parts. The exact word he used was bleeped out by NBC.
But Gervais later retweeted a post saying that the broadcaster had only bleeped two things in his monologue.
Columnist Scott Feinberg said in the post: 'I’m told NBC beeped only two things in Ricky’s monologue, "m**ge" and "f**k off" not "giant p***y". I asked a high-ranking HFPA official if she was angry about the choice of words and she just shook her head with resignation: "You can’t get him and muzzle him, you know?"'
It is the fifth time Gervais has emceed the gala, after previously fronting the show from 2010 to 2012 and once again in 2016.
The 58-year-old British comedian sat down for a new interview with The Hollywood Reporter as he discussed the difficulty in balancing comedy with political correctness and Hollywood egos.
When asked if he had any particular targets for this year's jokes, the comic insisted he wouldn't be zeroing in on any one star.
'I don't think this time [any] individuals are [in the firing line],' he said.
War epic '1917' shocked the Golden Globes on Sunday by claiming the top prize for best drama film, while Quentin Tarantino's 'Once Upon a Time... in Hollywood' won the most honors, massively boosting their prospects for next month's Oscars.
'Once Upon a Time...' - an homage to 1960s Tinseltown - won three prizes including best comedy, but Martin Scorsese's much-vaunted Netflix crime saga 'The Irishman' went home empty-handed.
The Globes are the first major awards gala of the year, in a packed season that ends with the Academy Awards in just over a month's time, so Sunday's winners will hope to capitalize on some much-needed momentum.
'1917' follows two British soldiers through the trenches in World War I, and is filmed to look like one continuous, two-hour-long shot.
'Goodness me, that is a big surprise,' said stunned filmmaker Sam Mendes, who bested Scorsese and Tarantino in the crowded best director category.
Best dressed stars: Reese Witherspoon, Jennifer Aniston, Margot Robbie, and Kerry Washington led the red carpet glamour at the 2020 Golden Globes at the Beverly Hilton Hotel on Sunday
Red hot: Scarlett brought the va va voom in a fiery red dress with dramatic train
Hello petal! Taylor Swift hit a fashion high note in an elegant blue Etro Couture dress with yellow floral pattern
Family man: Joining the Forest Gump actor were his sons Colin, Chet, and Truman Hanks
Arriving in style: Once Upon A Time In Hollywood stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Brad Pitt put on a debonair display on the red carpet
Rays of light! Sienna Miller, Gugu Mbatha-Raw, Cate Blanchett and Zoey Deutch shone in their cheerful vibrant frocks
They had the same idea! Awkwafina, Cynthia Erivo, Phoebe Waller-Bridge and Zoe Kravitz sported black-and-white for the Hollywood celebration
Dedicating the film to his grandfather who signed up to fight aged just 17, Mendes added: 'I hope he's looking down on us and I fervently hope it never happens again.'
The film's lead actor George MacKay - a 27-year-old relative unknown in Hollywood - told AFP he was 'just thrilled, proper thrilled' when the announcement was made.
'It's a wonderful thing. It's truly just so brilliant for the film and everyone involved. It's the biggest team effort ever.'
Tarantino won the best screenplay award, and Brad Pitt took home best supporting actor honors for his role as a loyal stuntman to Leonardo DiCaprio's character in 'Once Upon a Time...'
'I also have to thank my partner in crime, LDC,' said Pitt.
'I wouldn't be here without you, man... I would have shared the raft, though,' he added, referring to the closing scene of 'Titanic.'
'Rocketman,' the Elton John musical biopic, was the other big winner on the night, scooping best actor for Taron Egerton and best original song for John, who was heavily involved in the movie.
'I'm overjoyed - it's incredible,' Egerton told AFP. 'It's been the best experience of my life, and winning this is just such a lovely crystallization of all of that.'
The top films clearly resonated with the 90-odd members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association (HFPA), which doles out the prizes, but frontrunners in the acting categories also made their mark.
Joaquin Phoenix cemented his Oscar favorite status by winning the best drama actor prize for his radical turn in 'Joker,' a dark and controversial take on the comic book super-villain.
He thanked director Todd Phillips, saying: 'You convinced me to do this movie and you encouraged me to give everything and to be sincere. And I'm such a pain in the ass.'
Like several A-listers, Phoenix also used his speech to address climate change and the Australian wildfires.
Renee Zellweger burnished her Oscar credentials with an expected win for biopic 'Judy,' portraying Judy Garland in her later years.
South Korean black comedy 'Parasite' bagged the award for best foreign language film, as widely expected, while Awkwafina became the first actress of Asian descent to win the best comedy actress prize for 'The Farewell.'
Oscar nominations voting is already under way, but does not close until Tuesday - meaning the Globes results could be a factor.