92,000 Coloradoans to Lose Health Insurance as More Companies Quit, Hike Rates Because of Obamacare
The implosion of the private health insurance system in this country continues… by design.
Some 92,000 individual plan holders of not one but four health insurance companies in Colorado are going to have to start looking for new health insurance coverage in 2017 thanks to Obamacare.
According to the Colorado Division of Insurance, Anthem, UnitedHealthCare, Humana and Rocky Mountain Health Plans will no longer be offering individual coverage in that state.
The Washington Times reported that Colorado’s Insurance Commissioner Marguerite Salazar described the upheaval as part of the “stabilization phase” — really? It’s the fourth year of Obamacare… doesn’t it seem like this situation should be “stabilized” by now?
Meanwhile, other companies are proposing rate hikes in Colorado of up to 40%. In fact, pretty much of all of the health insurance companies left in Colorado are asking for steep rate increases:
Most of those remaining on the exchange are asking the board to approve steep price increases. One health care provider, Golden Rule, is seeking a 40.6 percent rate hike while Rocky Mountain HMO wants to raise its rates by 34.6 percent and Colorado Choice is asking for a 36.3 percent jump.
That’s a 40.6% increase that no one can afford to pay as wages for the bottom half of income earners in this country have actually fallen by 4.6% since 1973 and stagnated for everyone since 1999, while the cost of living in nearly every area including food, shelter, and energy have continued to rise.
This story is similar to what’s happening in other states across the country. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, the largest private insurer in the state, is asking for a 60% rate hike. When a division of the same health insurance company asked for a similar hike in New Mexico and was denied, they pulled out of the state, forcing all of those people to find new health insurance.
And, as I previously reported, this is all happening by design, a problem-reaction-solution to force the country onto a single-payer federal health care system.
Obama talked about how much of a fan he was of that idea back when he was first on the campaign trail.
Chief architect of Obamacare Ezekial Emanuel, the brother of Chicago mayor and former Obama staffer Rahm Emanuel, has been gleefully championing the destruction of private health insurance companies in America ever since Obamacare passed:
Emanuel writes that Obamacare is already causing insurance companies to either die or evolve into something else… Obamacare was not sold to the American people as a means of destroying private health insurance companies or even forcing them into turning into a different type of company. It was sold as a means of bringing insurance costs down while increasing access. It has turned out to cause about 6.2 million Americans to lose their insurance while forcing some Americans to buy insurance or pay a fine to the IRS. “If you like your healthcare, you can keep your healthcare,” President Barack Obama repeatedly promised. Emanuel’s article provides more evidence that the president was knowingly lying, and that people like Emanuel, who were close advisers while Obamacare was being written, knew that it would cause chaos for millions of Americans and their insurance… Ezekiel has consistently predicted, after Obamacare became law, that it would kill insurance companies.
Wonderful considering he’s the same guy who thinks we should all kill ourselves by age 75… Death panels, anyone?
That’s right. Obamacare was intentionally designed to fail because it was the only way they could force the country onto a federal system of socialized medicine. Rep. Michael Burgess even said so. Now we’re all watching it happen.
Melissa Dykes is a writer, researcher, and analyst for The Daily Sheeple and a co-creator of Truthstream Media with Aaron Dykes, a site that offers teleprompter-free, unscripted analysis of The Matrix we find ourselves living in. Melissa also co-founded Nutritional Anarchy with Daisy Luther of The Organic Prepper, a site focused on resistance through food self-sufficiency. Wake the flock up!