State lawmakers in the House and Senate are trying to help ex-cons who have been studying a trade more easily secure gainful employment when they are released.
On Dec. 18 the Pennsylvania House voted 193-to-4, approving House Bill 1477, making it easier for former inmates to receive vocational licenses, including for careers as nurses or hair dressers. Currently, licensing boards can automatically deny certification to applicants with a felony.
“Our legislation would require that boards ... apply one common set of rules when considering whether to deny, suspend, or revoke a license ... on the basis of a criminal conviction,” state Reps. Sheryl Delozier and Jordan Harris said in a memo introducing the bill.
The House bill is similar to a Senate bill unanimously passed in November. Unlike Senate Bill 637, the House bill allows boards to award licenses to those who took job training while behind bars, on a restricted basis.
One organization that would be impacted by the change is the State Correctional Institution at Laurel Highlands, which provides vocational training to its inmates.
Donna Platt, SCI-Laurel Highlands superintendent’s assistant, said with so many pieces of legislation still on the table, it’s premature to comment on their impact with the facility’s programs.
“However, the (Department of Corrections) will continue to provide opportunities and vocational training, including those that require an occupational license,” she said. “And if or when a bill is enacted, we’ll review the final language and make the appropriate adjustments.”
Pennsylvania has 29 professional licensing boards and commissions, and more than 250 types of licenses.
“Many people who have paid their debts to society after incarceration are hindered from reentering the workforce when boards deny licenses due to convictions unconnected to the practice of their desired profession,” Senators John DiSanto and Judith Schwank said in a memo introducing Senate Bill 637. “This wastes taxpayer dollars as state correctional institutions regularly train inmates in professional skills only for the person to be subsequently denied a license to practice.”
Local CareerLink site administrator Jeff Dick said the legislation wouldn’t directly impact how they run their vocational programs, but they would see more individuals using their programs.
“The more marketable skills they have, the better chances there are for them finding full-time, sustainable family sustaining wage employment,” he said. “And that’s the key and what (CareerLink) is trying to do.”
CareerLink works with several organizations, including SCI-Laurel Highlands, on reintegrating ex-inmates into the workforce. Dick said CareerLink provides on-the-job training programs and paid work experience for new employees using their services.
“We have a welcome team that sits down with these individuals to try and get as much information to see what resources are best for them,” he said.
House and Senate members must now consolidate their bills to pass through the legislature and end up on Gov. Tom Wolf’s desk.
Wolf spokesman J.J. Abbott said the governor supports the underlying concepts of both bills. Abbott added that the Wolf administration continues to support efforts to “ease the burdens of professional licensure and make it easier for individuals to receive licenses.”
“The administration continues to work with the legislature and the Department of State on the specific language,” he said.
While the legislation is still being worked on in Harrisburg, Dick said he encourages ex-convicts to meet with CareerLink about employment opportunities.
“All our services are free, and we’re just here to help,” he said.
Go to www.dailyamerican.com to see copies of House Bill 1477 and Senate Bill 637.