The decade may have changed over, but comedian Dave Chappelle is remaining true to form, announcing a handful of shows in San Francisco a day before they are scheduled to take place.
This time, Chappelle will perform three shows at the Valencia Street venue The Chapel, with one on Saturday at 10 p.m., and two on Sunday, at 7 p.m. and 10 p.m. Tickets for all shows will go on sale Saturday at noon at The Chapel's website.
Chappelle has a bit of a fondness for the Bay Area, and plays in local venues several times a year, often booking and announcing them as surprise shows. Sometimes, he even makes appearances at other artists' shows, as he did at the Madlib set during last year's Noise Pop Festival.
RELATED: Dave Chappelle, Yasiin Bey surprise Madlib's Noise Pop crowd with stage dive, verses, jokes
Chappelle's favorite local venue, however, may be the Punch Line Comedy Club in San Francisco's Financial District, which he campaigned to save from redevelopment in May.
"Just to give you some context, any storied comedian will tell you that the Punch Line is not just an SF phenomenon, it’s an American phenomenon," he told an audience in front of San Francisco City Hall, "It’s one of the premium comedy clubs in all the country; it’s a legendary room up there with the Comedy Cellar in New York and all the the rest of them. When they say special things happen in that room it’s an understatement: when I quit [my] show it became like a home to me."
Chappelle has stayed busy in recent years, releasing four Netflix specials, winning two Emmys, two Grammys (another nomination for 2020 is pending), and earning the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.
His shows at The Chapel this weekend will be intimate performances; as such, there are special rules in place.
For starters, no cell phones or cameras will be allowed during the show. As with other recent comic performances, attendees will need to secure their phones in Yondr pouches that will be unlocked upon leaving the venue.
The Chapel is also taking precautionary measures to avoid scalping, and will only sell two tickets per buyer.
Dave Chappelle will perform three shows at the Chapel in San Francisco on Saturday, January 4 and Sunday, January 5, 2020. Tickets will be available at The Chapel's website at noon on Saturday, January 4.
Alyssa Pereira is an SFGate digital editor. Email: alyssa.pereira@sfgate.com | Twitter: @alyspereira
