The Prime Minister has spoken about the angry reception he received in the bushfire-ravaged town of Cobargo on the NSW South Coast.
Speaking on 3AW this morning, Scott Morrison said the heckles, insults and heated words he copped from locals in the town was because they were hurting amid the ongoing crisis.
"Whether they're angry with me or their angry with the situation, they're hurting," he said.
"And it's my job to offer comfort and support.
Mr Morrison was touring the devastated region after fire tore through the township on Monday night, tragically killing a father and son.
After taking snaps with a few locals, Mr Morrison was ushered into a waiting car after locals began yelling their disapproval of the PM.
He was widely criticised for grabbing the hand of a volunteer firefighter who had declined to shake his hand.
Moments later, Mr Morrison excused the man's behaviour, describing the firefighter as "tired", before being told he'd just lost his own home while battling the ferocious blaze attacking his town.
Read more: NSW Liberal Minister Andrew Constance lashes out at PM
Scott Morrison has been criticised for grabbing the hand of a volunteer firefighter who declined a handshake as he pondered the loss of his own home in blaze. (9News)
The PM made excuses for the firefighter who rejected his handshake before being told he'd actually lost his home while fighting the intense blaze closing in on his town. (9News)
Locals told Scott Morrison he was not welcome in their town. (9News)
"You won't be getting any votes down here buddy," one resident can be heard yelling.
Another can be heard referring to the recent Sydney Harbour New Year's Eve fireworks display, which the PM watched from his government residence at Kirribilli.
"Go home to Kirribilli. Why won't that burn down?" another local yelled.
The Prime Minister was touring Cobargo to hear of the devastation as a result of the fires. (9News)
Residents expressed their concerns at PM Scott Morrison in the fire-ravaged town of Cobargo. (9News)
Others complained that government assistance was too slow to reach the town of Cobargo.
"This is not fair. We are totally forgotten down here. Every single time this area gets a flood or a fire we get nothing," yelled another.
"If we lived in Sydney or on the North Coast we would be flooded with donations and emergency relief."
Mr Morrison later told the ABC that he understood the strong feelings people in fire-ravaged areas have.
"I'm not surprised people are feeling very raw at the moment," Mr Morrsion told the ABC.
"And that's why I came today, to be here, to see it for myself, to offer what comfort I could
"I understand the very strong feelings people have, they've lost everything. And there is still some very dangerous days ahead."
As soon as the yelling began the PM bid a hasty exit for a waiting Commonwealth car. (9News)
"It is the Prime Minister's attempt at sympathy and empathy and support, but didn't it backfire," 9News reporter Chris O'Keefe told Today.
"At the end of the day Scott Morrison was in Hawaii and he is pilloried for being out of the country and pilloried for not being anywhere in the last couple of weeks, not being on the front line of the fires, being at Kirribilli House - and he goes to the frontline and he cops this.
"This is a by-product of how it has been had handled by the Prime Minister. They are angry and they need someone to blame and it is Scott Morrison.
"If he wasn't getting the point, he got it yesterday in Cobargo.
"This RFS volunteer, he was fighting fires but he lost his own house. That is why he was so upset. This is palpable for these residents and Scott Morrison just walked straight into it."
Morrison grabbed the hand of a volunteer firefighter who declined a handshake as he pondered the loss of his won house in the fires. (AAP)
The township of Cobargo was one of the hardest hit in NSW, with the entire main street destroyed by the flames.
Tragically, the bodies of farmers Patrick Salway and his 63-year-old father Robert Salway were discovered on Tuesday morning by Robert's wife (the mother of Patrick).
The pair had perished after choosing to stay and defend the family property at Wandella, 20km north-west of Cobargo.
Yesterday Mr Morrison defended the federal government's role in the response to the ongoing bushfire crisis.
A resident of Cobargo surveys the rubble of his burnt-out home. (9News)
In a press conference on Thursday afternoon, he said a "coordinated response" was what was needed, at the same time calling for "patience" from disaster-hit Australians.
"What we won't allow to happen is for governments to be tripping over each other in order to somehow outbid each other in response," he said.
He urged Australians to have patience, days after some of their homes burned.
29-year-old Patrick Salway (right) and his wife Renee. Patrick tragically perished in the fires while protecting the family home. (Facebook)
"My simple request is to be patient, to have confidence in the state agencies," he said.