Just days after the TaKeTV TakeOver, Rogue has announced they are parting ways with iddqd. Read on for a statement from the team.
This seems to be a recurring thing in eSports, and it's not skipping Overwatch: teams dropping players right after big victories. It has happened in CS:GO, it has happened in LoL and now Overwatch is a real eSport in yet another way.
Rogue won the better part of the $5,000 prizepool in Germany this weekend, after an impressive resurgence in the Grand Finals. The current meta involving a lot of McCree certainly fit TviQ and iddqd well, but it seems iddqd didn't fit Rogue quite as well. In a statement from the team, the reasons for parting ways were explained:
” Following our success at last weekend's TakeTV TakeOver tournament, it became apparent to the team that we could not continue playing and competing with André "IDDQD" Dahlström. The departure of IDDQD comes following the rest of the roster’s lack of trust in IDDQD to settle in, adjusting to our mindset and ideas, and his ability to perform in high pressure environments. There is no doubt IDDQD possess one of the most dangerous McCree’s in the competitive Overwatch scene, and we wish him the best of luck moving forward, and we hope to compete against him in the near future. Moving forward, we in Rogue’s Overwatch team, have a few ideas of what type of player we’re looking for, and we hope to be able to announce our new 6th player the coming days. ”
After inquiry, the team stated they won't be playing tournaments this weekend, but expect to be back in the running soon regardless. Meanwhile iddqd, while teamless right now, was not put down by the situation:
” It was very evident for me that the team and myself weren't sharing the same mindset going forward. That being said - I'm very happy to have been a part of such a strong roster even for such a short time. I'm grateful for the experience that I learned along the way. I cannot specifically mention a player alone, so I'll just go ahead and wish all of the players the very best in the upcoming future, so that we can cross paths again, but this time as rivals on the battlefield. And please, change the logo :) ”
The original roster of Rogue, which won ThePlays' Launch event as well as the TakeOver, included:
