Sign up to the Hull Live newsletter for daily updates and breaking news
Detectives have launched an investigation after a "fat naked man with a small penis" performed a sex act in front of a student.
Officers received a call from a distressed female who said a man "with testicles that hang noticeably low" had performed a sex act on himself in front of her on Sunday afternoon in York.
North Yorkshire Police say they are attempting to locate the man, who is believed to be aged between 35 and 45 and described as being of "fat build".
The female described her attacker as of a "very pale complexion" and the force say police patrols have been stepped up in Hull Road following the mid-afternoon incident.
In a statement, officers said: "The incident occurred at 1.15pm on Sunday (Nov 18) as the 20-year-old woman was walking alone on Windmill Lane onto the woodland cycle path in the direction of Hull Road.
Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will auto-play soon 8 Cancel Play now
"He then performed the sex act on himself. The man remained in the same location for around five minutes before making off.
"The woman quickly walked away and reported the incident to the police and inquiries are ongoing to locate the man, including a trawl of CCTV covering the area.
"Police patrols have been stepped up in the area to provide public reassurance while the investigation continues.
"The suspect is described as white with a very pale complexion, aged between 35 and 45 years, around 5ft 10in tall with a fat build. He has very little chest or pubic hair, no obvious tattoos or scars, and he has what was described as a small penis with testicles that hang noticeably low."
Anyone with information that could assist the investigation is urged to call North Yorkshire Police on 101, select option 1, and speak to the Force Control Room.
Our daily newsletter - To get the latest headlines direct to your email inbox every day, click here .
Follow Hull Live on Facebook - Like our Facebook page to get the latest news in your feed and join in the lively discussions in the comments. Click here to give it a like!
Follow us on Twitter - For breaking news and the latest stories, click here to follow Hull Live on Twitter.
Follow us on Instagram - On the Hull Live Instagram page we share gorgeous pictures of our stunning city - and if you tag us in your posts, we could repost your picture on our page! We also put the latest news in our Instagram Stories. Click here to follow Hull Live on Instagram