We have just heard back from Asmodee Digital regarding the closure of Fantasy Flight Interactive and whether The Lord of the Rings: Adventure Card Game will continue to receive support. Asmodee provided TA with this statement:
We regret FFI’s closure which will be occurring next month and would like to thank the whole team for their hard work and the fruitful collaboration we have enjoyed these last years. We will continue to support the game’s servers, including its co-op multiplayer mode, beyond FFI’s closure, ensuring an optimal experience for players venturing across Middle-earth.
Ultimate 3 Months Xbox Game Pass Ultimate includes over 100 high-quality games for console, PC, phones and tablets, all the benefits of Xbox Live Gold, and an EA Play membership, all for one low monthly price (subscription continues automatically at regular price). Play together with friends and discover your next favorite game. See more below.
After any promotional period, subscription continues to be charged at the then-current regular price (subject to change, plus applicable taxes), unless cancelled in Microsoft account. You’ll be notified before any price changes.
Joining Xbox Game Pass Ultimate will upgrade your remaining Xbox Live Gold or Xbox Game Pass for Console or Xbox Game Pass for PC time into Xbox Game Pass Ultimate for the same amount of time, up to 36 months. All conversions are final. See xbox.com/gamepass for details.
See Xbox Game Pass Ultimate terms and details in the Product Description below. $1.00 $44.99 £1.00 £32.99 €1.00 €38.99 $1.00 $47.95 $1.00 $49.99 R$1.00 R$134.99 Set price alert
The studio behind The Lord of the Rings: Adventure Card Game , Fantasy Flight Interactive, is closing just two months after the game's console release, and only two years of being in business according to studio head, Tim Gerritsen.Fantasy Flight Interactive, a studio launched by the board game company Fantasy Flight Games will close its doors in February this year, as announced by studio head Tim Gerritsen in a post over on LinkedIn . Gerritsen said, "It's with great sadness that I have to report that the decision has been made to close Fantasy Flight Interactive next month. I'm proud of the team and the game we've dedicated ourselves to for the past few years. It's been an amazing journey with even more amazing people. I'm going to do my best to get my team placed in new positions."Fantasy Flight Interactive's only game is The Lord of the Rings: Adventure Card Game which released earlier this year on PC in August followed by a console release in November. The card game also launched into Xbox Game Pass . As it stands, it's currently unclear whether publisher Asmodee Digital will continue to support the game. Looking at Steamcharts.com , the player base has dwindled to just double-digit numbers, with its all-time peak player count being 417 back in July 2018 when the game was released in Early Access. We have reached out to Asmodee for clarification.If you're a fan of The Lord of the Rings Adventure Card Game, you might want to start working your way through the achievement list now in case support gets pulled. It's going to be a tough one to crack — nobody on-site is yet to complete it, not to mention the achievements all have weird Gamerscore values.In other Lord of the Rings video game news, Daedlic Entertainment released more information about its upcoming game, The Lord of the Rings: Gollum , which is also confirmed as a release for the Xbox Series X.