He is one of the best-selling music artists of all time, with worldwide sales of more than 80million records... and it turns out he's a bit of a catch, as well.
Meat Loaf, 72, told MailOnline he's always been able to get the best looking women, even when he was a 'fat motherf****', (his words).
The rock icon also discussed threesomes, losing 70lbs and why he thinks there's no such thing as climate change, claiming activist Greta Thunberg, 16, has been brainwashed.
'I got the best looking women when I was fat:' Self-confessed sex god, Meat Loaf, 72, on threesomes, losing 70lb and why he thinks Greta Thunberg has been brainwashed
Meatloaf, affectionately called Meat, is currently promoting Frankie And Benny's new vegetarian range, the concept being that Meat, backs VEG.
And beginning the interview, he said: 'You'll have to excuse me. I'm a little spaced out because I'm staying in character, but I'll do what I can. '
Married to Deborah Gillespie, Meat admitted he's never had a problem getting beautiful women and many of his songs do talk about his love-making prowess.
'Most of my songs are... well, true,' he said. 'They are story songs and I am really good at stories... I am a sex god, dear.
'I can't use bad language but people would ask me, "How can a fat M-F like you go out with all these good looking girls?"
Healthier: Meat Loaf was previously a vegetarian for 11 years and once went from 265lbs to what he weighs today, which is 195lbs (pictured in 1978)
'I said, "because I am not going out thinking about what you are thinking about".
'These days men don't open the doors, they don't do anything right. Truthfully, all they go out for is to get laid.
'I've never done that. It's not my first option; never has been - and that's why I've gone out with all these good looking women.'
Even at school, Meat Loaf, had a 'threeway', making out with two friends, Cindy and Judy.
He said: 'Oh yeah, that was the first double I had. We were making out in the parking lot in my mother's car.
Stunner: Currently married to Deborah Gillespie, Meat admitted he's never had a problem getting beautiful women and many of his songs talk about his expertise beneath the sheets
'My mother taught English and I happened to be in her class. Any kid whose mother is a teacher, and you wind up in their class, try to get out of it.
'If you were bad, you had to sit in the hall for five minutes. I was out in the hall all the time, but I didn't even do anything.
'She would say, "I know, but you've got to come to a higher standard than everyone else. I didn't even know what the hell she was talking about.'
Meat Loaf was a vegetarian for 11 years and once went from 265lbs to what he weighs today, which is 195lbs.
When asked if he has any tips on weightloss, he said: 'I will tell you how to lose weight. Look at the fat and the sugar content. Don't worry about the calories.
'Don't eat anything over 5g of fat and 3g of sugar. I once did a low carb diet and lost 70lbs but I put it all back on.'
Meat Loaf's Frankie And Benny's commercial is his first 'proper' job in four years because he has been in agony after four back surgeries.
He spends his evenings watching Law And Order and Prodigal Son and says he is keen for Netflix to hire him for a role.
Views: Meat believes there is no such thing as climate change and is convinced Greta Thunberg (pictured) has been brainwashed
Inching uncomfortably in his seat, he explained that he's still in constant pain if he sits still for too long.
'I feel a lot better than I did. I had the last surgery in 2016 and the first in 2015,' he said.
'With the first one, the screw came out and so they put in these basket type things... three of them. Within four weeks, two of those baskets had come out.
'My wife told me that I was in so much pain but I couldn't really remember it. That's how bad it was.'
Meat, who famously worked with President Trump on The Apprentice back in 2010, said he believes there is no such thing as climate change.
'I feel for that Greta. She has been brainwashed into thinking that there is climate change and there isn't.
'She hasn't done anything wrong but she's been forced into thinking that what she is saying is true.'
Would you do anything for Veg this January? Try Frankie & Benny's delicious new Meat-Free dishes, with 50% off mains from the 5th - 31st Jan.