A WOMAN stabbed her boyfriend more than 50 times in the neck, chest and stomach before killing herself, an inquest heard.
Jessena Sheridan and Gary Williams' deaths are being thought of as a suspected murder-suicide, after the pair were found at home.
4 Gary Williams was found dead in his partner's home in Wales - he is thought to have been murdered Credit: Athena Picture Agency
4 Cops investigated and believe the deaths are a murder-suicide Credit: Adrian White/Media Wales
The inquest was told the 58-year-old is thought to have been stabbed multiple times in an attack by his 46-year-old partner.
They were both found dead in the bedroom of a house in Llanelli, Carmarthenshire, on December 29.
The inquest in Haverfordwest was told Ms Sheridan died from "self-inflicted wounds", after she was discovered feet away from her boyfriend's body.
Trainee coroner's officer, Maggie Julian, told the hearing Mr Williams, from Gowerton in Swansea, was found with multiple injuries.
A provisional report on his death indicated he died from stab wounds to the neck, chest and stomach.
Neighbour Carol Mutter, 63, said after the couple were found: "It is very sad especially at this time of year."
Another neighbour said: "I feel like something was wrong because the blinds have been closed the past couple of days.
"It’s usually a nice place to live around here but it is really frightening that something like that could happen so near to me."
A spokeswoman for Dyfed-Powys Police said: "The police investigation will not result in any criminal prosecution. The matter has been referred to HM Coroner.
"The families wish to be given privacy to grieve at this time."
The inquest into both deaths was adjourned until May.
4 The couple were found on December 29 in the bedroom of the Llanelli home Credit: Adrian White ©
4 The inquest was told the 58-year-old is thought to have been stabbed multiple times in an attack by his 46-year-old partner Credit: Adrian White ©
If you are affected by any of the issues raised in this article, please call the Samaritans on (free) 116123