This dramatic footage appears to show the 20-stone ISIS executioner dubbed The Bulldozer being captured by the Syrian army.
The obese extremist, a member of the terror group's so-called Chopping Committee, is seen lying half-naked in the back of a truck with his hands tied behind his back.
Crowds gather round to take pictures of the hulking jihadi, who appears to be grimacing, before he is driven off by Syrian Armed Forces in the footage posted online by Syrian sources.
Dramatic footage appears to show the 20-stone ISIS executioner dubbed the Bulldozer being captured in Syria
The obese extremist, a member of the terror group's so-called Chopping Committee, is seen lying half-naked in the back of a truck with his hands tied behind his back as crowds gather round celebrating his capture
The militant has gained a bloody reputation as one of ISIS's most feared butchers after beheading dozens of prisoners and amputating young children.
He has infamously been pictured in black robes and a mask while wielding a three-foot sword to behead his victims.
But just like Jihadi John, the ISIS executioner who was eventually unveiled as Mohammed Emwazi, the coward has apparently never dared to show his face on camera.
One of the first images of The Bulldozer surfaced in June 2014 when he was pictured wielding what appears to be a five-foot-long, 52kg Browning machine gun, with armour-piercing bullets.
Obese executioner: The 30-stone jihadi has become infamous as one of ISIS's most feared executioners
One of the first pictures of The Bulldozer to surface showed the man-mountain carrying what appears to be a Browning machine gun (pictured), which can weigh up to 52kg
In March, this picture of a chubby militant emerged that led to speculation it could be the face of The Bulldozer
The weapon, which can be used as a light anti-aircraft gun, is usually mounted on turrets, tanks or fixed structures.
ISIS websites also published pictures of the same man beheading two suspected blasphemers in front of hundreds of men and young boys in Iraq's Anbar province.
Images show the terrorist leaping into the air before bringing the large sword crashing down onto the neck of his helpless victims.
A final picture shows the bloody corpses of the headless men strewn across the courtyard as his fellow terrorists disperse the gathered crowds.
Scarred for life: A 14-year-old Syrian boy, known only as Omar (pictured), described how the obese ISIS executioner known as The Bulldozer hacked off his hand and foot
Bitter end: Omar says 'The Bulldozer' (pictured after carrying out a beheading in Iraq) gathered children to watch the bloody amputation
Last year, a 14-year-old Syrian boy told how the mammoth extremist chopped off his hand and foot because he refused to join ISIS.
Omar, who was captured fighting for a rebel group and tortured for more than a month, said the Bulldozer gathered a large group of children to watch the bloody amputation.
Omar kept an image of the man who mutilated him on his mobile phone.
It showed the monster, dressed-head-toe in black, propping himself up with the blade he uses to maim helpless youngsters.
In March, a picture of a chubby militant emerged that led to speculation it could be the face of The Bulldozer.