The Hillary Clinton email scandal is ongoing. As is to be expected, Hillary and her spin doctors publicly say the email server scandal is nothing. The former Secretary of State has brought out her main attack dog, John Podesta. Podesta is Hillary’s campaign director. He made light of her use of the private email server, calling it “a mistake.”
On Monday, BuzzFeed reported Podesta sent a memo to hundreds of Hillary’s top supporters, saying just that, it was “a mistake.”
That memo just perpetuates a long line of excuses that make no sense. If Hillary was ignorant of the laws regulating her position as former Secretary of State, how can she be trusted to do anything? After all, she is a lawyer. Even though her law degree was earned decades ago, she should know the law.
She treats her supporters as clueless useful idiots. It appears they will buy whatever she decides to sell them.
Bust this is just the Clinton persona at work. Hillary just denies everything and blames any problems on the vast right-wing conspiracy. Her problems with the inspector general’s office and the ongoing FBI criminal investigation may seem overwhelming, but they are only a very small blip on the radar, compared to her decades-long list of lies, cover-ups, scandals and corruption. That can be easily seen in this 12-minute video:
The State Department’s Office of the Inspector General released the damning report and on that day, Podesta said it was nothing. His aim was obviously to head off inspection of the report by Hillary’s supporters. The IG said that while she was Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton knowingly disregarded the department’s security guidelines by using a private computer server.
These people are just amazing! Hillary’s “the dog ate my homework” explanation doesn’t hold water. Podesta weakly said “she believed she was following the practices of other secretaries of state.”
Yeah, right, point the finger at someone else – it is always someone else’s fault.
Podesta was preaching to the choir when he said “look at the full picture of everything she has done throughout her career and be focused on solutions that will make a real difference in people’s lives.”
Podesta should have watched that video before he wrote those words. Maybe he did, and he is the straight man. His memo was meant for voters who either don’t have a clue, or who choose to ignore Hillary’s transgressions dating back to her husband’s presidency (1993 – 2001).
Politico reports that the Hillary campaign’s spin doesn’t even come close to the language in the report.
Podesta’s letter tried to say that had she “known of any concerns about her email setup at the time, she would have taken steps to address them.”
Thankfully, people are watching and listening. The Daily Caller pointed out that although former Secretary of State Colin Powell had a private email account, he didn’t have his own private server.
If she cared, Hillary could have picked up the phone and called Powell. But that’s not how Hillary works. In her world, the law is for suckers, and it is easier to do what you want and pretend to apologize or feign ignorance later.
Apparently Hillary likes to duck and weave and spin endlessly. It is much more fun to be in control, rather than to conform to the rules that apply to everyone else.