WASHINGTON — Bernie Sanders calls it the “big enchilada.”
California, the most delegate-rich state on the Democratic primary calendar, has recently become almost a second home for the Vermont senator as he barnstorms there ahead of Tuesday's primary. In May alone, Sanders' more than two dozen rallies in the state drew more than 160,000 people. The campaign expects its biggest turnouts this weekend in San Diego, Los Angeles and San Francisco.
“By the time our campaign in California is over on Monday, we will have spoken to a quarter-of-a-million people in California, face to face,” Sanders said Thursday at a news conference in Modesto. “That may well be unprecedented, but that’s the kind of campaign that we are running. It’s a grass-roots campaign, it’s going directly to the people, and I think that is why we stand an excellent chance to win it on Tuesday.”
Even if that happens, Sanders would still be far from overtaking Hillary Clinton’s commanding lead in pledged delegates and in superdelegates, the party leaders and elected officials who can vote for the candidate of their choice at the Democratic National Convention.
Counting her superdelegate support, Clinton is only 71 delegates short of the magic number of 2,383 needed to clinch the nomination, according to the Associated Press. She undoubtedly will reach that number on Tuesday, when voters cast ballots in California (475 delegates) and five other states. After that, only the District of Columbia’s June 14 primary will remain.
But a California victory would keep Sanders’ campaign going and help him make his case to superdelegates that he’s the best candidate to defeat presumptive GOP nominee Donald Trump. That would create a “summer of agony” for Clinton leading up to the convention, forcing her to fend off both Trump and Sanders simultaneously, said Brad Bannon, a Democratic pollster and consultant.
“If Sanders loses California, it’s hard for him to tell the superdelegates that ‘I’m the better candidate,’” said Bannon, who has stayed neutral in the race. “Even if he wins California, he’s not going to be the nominee, but he will keep his campaign alive and there will still be a lot of sniping between Sanders and Clinton. That means she can’t focus on what she wants to do, which is win over the Sanders people.”
Clinton leads Sanders in California by only about 6 points, according to a RealClearPolitics average of recent polls. A NBC News/Wall Street Journal/Marist Poll released this week showed Sanders only 2 points behind Clinton among California’s likely Democratic electorate.
New poll shows Clinton leads Sanders by just two points in California
Sanders’ focus on the state hasn’t gone unnoticed by Clinton’s campaign. Clinton, who defeated Barack Obama in the 2008 California primary, changed her schedule to be in California on Thursday rather than in New Jersey, which also holds its primary Tuesday. Clinton's California state director, Buffy Wicks, sent out a May 16 fundraising letter telling supporters that although the primary is “all but over,” “Bernie’s team is working hard to pull off a big upset here to try and make some trouble.”
“We need to be strong enough to take on Bernie’s grassroots army and Donald Trump at the same time,” Wicks wrote.
Clinton has a strong ground game and support from all major Democrats in the state, said Mindy Romero, director of the California Civic Engagement Project at the University of California, Davis, Center for Regional Change. On Tuesday, Gov. Jerry Brown endorsed her, citing her “long experience,” “firm grasp of the issues” and preparedness.
Gov. Jerry Brown says he'll support Clinton, says general election has started
But California has seen an unprecedented surge of newly registered voters — 1.1 million between January and April — driven largely by an easier online registration process launched in 2012, Romero said. Millennials aged 18-34 comprise more than 53% of those voters. That could bode well for Sanders, whose coalition includes young people and independents.
“We think that these voters are particularly motivated, they’re registering in big numbers, and because they’re young, we know from polls that they’re going to favor Bernie,” she said. “He has to seal the deal and get them to actually turn out.”
Sanders said on Meet the Press on Sunday that his strategy is to win California, perform “very, very well” in the five other states, and go to the convention with a majority of pledged delegates. That would require winning 67% of those remaining, which Sanders acknowledges is an “uphill fight.”
He also aims to win the support of superdelegates from states where he won landslide victories — such as Washington, Minnesota, Colorado and New Hampshire — and make the case to many others that he would be the stronger candidate against Trump. He highlights polls that show him outperforming Clinton against Trump in general election matchups.
“We’re going to fight till the last vote is cast and try to appeal to the last delegate that we can,” Sanders said on Meet the Press.
Already, some of his supporters are making that case for him.
On Tuesday, Jim Zogby, a Democratic National Committee official who will represent Sanders on the committee drafting the party platform, said he and others are starting to make calls “in earnest” to uncommitted superdelegates and to those who committed to Clinton early on. The message: “Take another look."
“If he wins California, I think it sends a very powerful message to the country as a whole, but also to Democrats, to superdelegates — some of whom made their mind up way too early and some of whom are still undecided — that this is a guy whose momentum is growing and they need to take a look at (him),” Zogby said. “Win or lose, I think he still has a compelling message to make. But I think if he wins it, it’s a compelling message writ large.”
