4 Jan 2020 07.01 Huge crowd expected for Suleimani funeral Hundreds of thousands of people are expected to line the streets of Baghdad today for the funeral procession of Qassem Suleimani, the Iranian general killed in a US drone attack, writes our Middle East-based correspondent, Michael Safi. Suleimani will also be honoured with processions in the holy Shia cities of Karbala and Najaf on Saturday, Iranian officials said, before his remains are taken to Iran for a prayer ceremony in Tehran and a burial in his hometown. The funeral comes against a backdrop of extremely high tension in Baghdad where militais reported airstrikes on another convoy of vehicles on Saturday morning killed at least five people. The US has denied responsibility. We’re closing the blog now but you read Michael’s full report here. Huge crowds expected in Baghdad for funeral of Iranian general killed by US Read more You can also read my colleague Mario Koran’s summary of the tumultuous events of the last 24 hours here. Thanks for reading.
4 Jan 2020 05.51 The statement from the US-led coalition, which is in Iraq and Syria to fight Islamic State, was tweeted out by a spokesman for Operation Inherent Resolve, Colonel Myles B Caggins. FACT: The Coalition @CJTFOIR did NOT conduct airstrikes near Camp Taji (north of Baghdad) in recent days. — OIR Spokesman Col. Myles B. Caggins III (@OIRSpox) January 4, 2020 Both Iraq’s umbrella grouping of Shia militias, the Popular Mobilisation Forces, and
Iraqi state television said the airstrikes had taken place and that they were carried out by the US.
4 Jan 2020 05.31 US denies latest airstrikes The US-led coalition in Iraq says it did not carry out Saturday’s airstrikes near Taj stadium in Baghdad that killed several people, a spokesman has said, according to Reuters. Hopefully we can expand on this soon.
4 Jan 2020 04.56 Reuters has some interesting background about what could have led to the killing of Suleimani. The news agency reports that in mid-October, the Revolutionary Guards general met Iraqi Shia militia allies “at a villa on the banks of the Tigris river, looking across at the US embassy complex in Baghdad”. At the meeting, Suleimani told his Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis and other powerful militia leaders to step up attacks on US targets in the country using sophisticated new weapons provided by Iran, two militia commanders and two security sources briefed on the gathering told Reuters. The meeting came as anti-Iranian protests were gathering strength in Iraq and the reports claims Suleimani wanted to up the ante against the US in order to provoke a response and turn the Iraqi protests against Washington. This is the full report here.
4 Jan 2020 03.38 Lack of official confirmation about the latest strikes means we’re feeling our way as to exactly what happened. Newsweek says it has been told by Pentagon officials that the attack was on the Imam Ali Brigades, an Iraqi Shia militia with ties to Iran. There was a “high probability” that the strike resulted in the death of the brigades leader, Newsweek says, adding that it was a US operation.
4 Jan 2020 03.02 Another thing to note on the new strikes is that a US government source has said it wasn’t an American operation. Associated Press, quoting an anonymous official, said it “was not an American military attack”. It’s only one anonymous source so we have to be cautious. Interesting though.
4 Jan 2020 02.52 Thanks to the US team. I’m Martin Farrer taking over the blog. There is a little bit more information about the airstrikes carried out on targets in Iraq early on Saturday morning local time that reportedly killed five members of Iranian-backed militia near Taj stadium in Baghdad. Although there is no official confirmation of the details, Iraq’s Popular Mobilisation Forces (PMUs) umbrella grouping of paramilitary groups have denied that senior leaders were killed. It says the vehicles were carrying medics. convoy of medics, not senior leaders as reported in some media, according to a statement reported by Reuters. The statement says: “Initial sources confirm that the strike targeted a convoy of Popular Mobilisation Forces medics near Taji stadium in Baghdad.”
Reuters goes on to quote an Iraqi army source saying that six people were killed in the strikes – not five – and that three were critically wounded.
4 Jan 2020 02.33 Evening Summary That does it for the live blog here on the west coast, but before I sign off and hand over the wheel to my colleagues in Australia, let’s take a look back at a very busy Friday. Here are some highlights from the afternoon. Earlier in the day Donald Trump defended the drone strike that killed Qassem Suleimani , Iran’s top general, claiming in a short statement to have taken the action required to stop a war. On the contrary, Majid Takht Ravanchi, the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations told CNN the US has started the war — and it can expect “harsh revenge.”
defended the drone strike that killed , Iran’s top general, claiming in a short statement to have taken the action required to stop a war. On the contrary, the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations told CNN the US has started the war — and it can expect “harsh revenge.” Meanwhile, the US is sending nearly 3,000 more army troops to the Middle East to squelch reprisals expected in the region.
Late in the afternoon reports surfaced of a fresh US airstrike which is believed to have hit a pro-Iran group of soldiers north of Baghdad. Details have been slowly trickling out, but still unconfirmed are the identities of the deceased.
And earlier in the afternoon Trump stumped at an Evangelical megachurch in Florida, where he lauded yesterday’s airstrike and touted actions he couched as his efforts to protect religious freedoms and Evangelical values. Reporter Richard Luscombe was on the scene reporting from Miami.
Finally, state department officials are trying to bolster claims from the president and the secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, that the killing of Suleimani stopped imminent attacks and was therefore an act of self-defence. “There were things he could do that nobody else could do,” a US official said of Suleimani. “He was not a decentralized manager; he was a hands-on, down-to-the-details manager. And we are not safe in the region as long as Iran is pursuing this general strategy, but we are safer without him than we are with him.”
4 Jan 2020 01.37 In newly aired interview, the Iranian ambassador to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi, said the US has already started a war by assassinating one of Iran’s top generals and promised the country will exact “harsh revenge”. “We cannot just close our eyes to what happened last night,” the ambassador told CNN. “Definitely there will revenge. There will be harsh revenge...the time, the place, will be decided by Iran.” "The response for a military action is a military action,” Iran’s ambassador to the United Nations, Majid Takht Ravanchi, tells @ErinBurnett. “By whom? By... when? Where? That is for the future to witness.” pic.twitter.com/XR6mCrLbys — OutFrontCNN (@OutFrontCNN) January 4, 2020 US officials are already bracing for retaliatory action. “The Pentagon ordered 3,000 reinforcements to the region, diplomats were reportedly told to pack their bags in case of sudden evacuation, and the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, called his counterparts around the world to try to persuade them the US was “committed to de-escalation”, the Guardian wrote earlier today. Read more here: Fears of new conflict in Middle East as Tehran vows to avenge killing Read more
4 Jan 2020 01.13 Along with the California representative Ro Khanna, the Vermont senator and presidential candidate Bernie Sanders today announced legislation that would prohibit any funding for offensive military force in or against Iran without prior congressional approval. “I am introducing a bill with Rep Khanna to stop Donald Trump from illegally taking us to war against Iran,” Sanders wrote on Twitter. “It’s working-class kids who will have to fight and die in a disastrous new Middle East conflict – not the children of billionaires.” I am introducing a bill with Rep. Khanna to stop Donald Trump from illegally taking us to war against Iran.
It's working-class kids who will have to fight and die in a disastrous new Middle East conflict—not the children of billionaires. https://t.co/H6ZHjijCnj — Bernie Sanders (@SenSanders) January 4, 2020
4 Jan 2020 00.43 In the wake of the strike that killed Iran’s top general, and a more recent offensive that claimed the lives of five yet-to-be-identified members of an Iran-backed militia, law enforcement officials in several major US cities are advising residents to remain watchful for retaliation. Guardian reporter Edward Helmore observes that officials in New York and Los Angeles have yet to encounter credible threats, but are remaining vigilant against potential threats. “You see something, say something,” the New York City mayor, Bill de Blasio, said on Twitter. We are in an unprecedented situation today, but the NYPD is ready for any scenario. New Yorkers will see heightened security at locations around the city, but there is NO credible and specific threat at this time. If you see something, say something. — Mayor Bill de Blasio (@NYCMayor) January 3, 2020 Helmore noted: In November, a ‘sleeper agent’ of Hezbollah, the Iran-backed Lebanese group listed by US authorities as a foreign terrorist organization, was sentenced to 40 years in prison by a federal court over plans to conduct terrorist attacks around New York. Prosecutors claimed that Ali Kourani was “recruited, trained and deployed by Hezbollah’s Islamic Jihad Organization” and had spent “years conducting surveillance on the city’s critical infrastructure, federal buildings, international airports, and even daycare centers”.
4 Jan 2020 00.04 Iraq official says airstrike targets Iran-backed militia, Associated Press reports The Associated Press has reported new details on the latest airstrike in Iraq which it attributes to an Iraqi official who says the strike hit two cars and killed five members of the Iran-backed militia they were carrying. The unnamed official said the identities of those killed are unknown. The salvo comes a day after a US drone strike that killed top Iranian general Gen Qassem Suleimani – an act of aggression which Iran has promised to avenge.
