Eden, Australia (CNN) The Australian federal government department responsible for managing emergencies shut its Canberra office due to poor air quality on Monday as the nation's capital choked on smoke from deadly bushfires .
On Monday, Canberra had a rating over 340 on the Air Quality Index -- higher than Beijing's 170. Australia has been ravaged by some of the worst wildfires seen in decades , with the massive blazes destroying homes, devastating wildlife, turning skies blood red and leaving a total of 24 people dead nationwide.
The Department of Home Affairs told non-essential staff to stay away from its Canberra headquarters, while the Department of Health told staff not to work out of one of its locations. Child care services in the city were also shut.
Visitors to Parliament House were forced to wear face masks after smoke from bushfires blankets Canberra in a haze on January 5.
YWCA Canberra -- which operates a number of child care centers -- said that like many Canberra organizations, it had opted to close all of its children's services in the Australian Capital Territory and the rural New South Wales town of Murrumbateman on Monday due to "hazardous smoke conditions."
"This is to ensure the health and well-being of our staff and the children in our services," YWCA Canberra said in a statement on its Facebook page.
Canberra's National Gallery of Australia was also closed on Monday due to the smoke. "Closing our doors allows us to mitigate any risk to the public, staff and works of art on display," a statement on the gallery's website said
Elsewhere in Australia on Monday, cooler weather and rain gave firefighters some relief. Shane Fitzsimmons, commissioner of the New South Wales Rural Fire Service (NSW RFS), said Monday that the conditions were a "welcome reprieve" -- but it wasn't putting out the fires.
"It's a psychological relief if nothing else," he said, noting that the rains weren't helping with back burning, a method of controlled burning that helps limit the spread of blazes.
Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Animal rescuer Marcus Fillinger carries a burned kangaroo on February 4 in Peak View, Australia. Fillinger tranquilized the wounded animal for transport to a recovery center. Hide Caption 1 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A bushfire burns near the town of Bumbalong, south of Canberra on February 2. Hide Caption 2 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Horses panic as a fire burns near Canberra, Australia, on Saturday, February 1. Hide Caption 3 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter coats a bridge with foam as a bushfire burns near Moruya, Australia, on Saturday, January 25. Hide Caption 4 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia In this long-exposure photo, a car's taillights streak at left as a wildfire glows at dusk near Clear Range, Australia, on Friday, January 31. Hide Caption 5 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia An airplane dumps fire retardant behind houses at the foot of Mount Tennent as fire creeps through the Namadgi National Park in Canberra on Thursday, January 30. Hide Caption 6 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia People embrace near the scene of a water tanker plane crash in Cooma, Australia, on Thursday, January 23. Three American crew members died in the crash. Hide Caption 7 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Flying embers are seen in this long-exposure photo from Moruya on Thursday, January 23. Hide Caption 8 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A young koala named Jeremy receives medical attention for burns at the Healesville Sanctuary in Badger Creek, Australia, on January 23. Hide Caption 9 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters battle the Morton Fire as it burns a home near Bundanoon, Australia, on January 23. Hide Caption 10 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia The Parliament House in Canberra is blanketed by bushfire smoke on January 23. Hide Caption 11 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter battles the Morton Fire as it consumes a home near Bundanoon on January 23. Hide Caption 12 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Veterinarian Ludo Valenza holds two grey-headed flying foxes, which were being treated for bushfire injuries at the Australia Zoo Wildlife Hospital in Beerwah, Australia, on Wednesday, January 15. Hide Caption 13 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Lt. Kynan Lang from the 10th/27th Battalion visits the scene where his uncle and cousin died in a bushfire on Australia's Kangaroo Island. Hide Caption 14 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A smoky haze from bushfires hovers over the Melbourne skyline ahead of the Australian Open tennis tournament on Tuesday, January 14. Poor air quality disrupted the qualifying rounds of the tournament. Hide Caption 15 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Properties damaged and destroyed by fire are seen in Nerrigundah, Australia, on Monday, January 13. Hide Caption 16 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Debris remains where houses stood in the Australian village of Wingello on January 13. Hide Caption 17 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Bonnie Morris and sister Raemi Morris look on as their family and firefighters battle bushfires at the edge of their family farm in Karatta on Saturday, January 11. Hide Caption 18 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Pictures of firefighters are projected onto the Sydney Opera House on January 11. Hide Caption 19 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A vehicle makes its way through thick fog mixed with bushfire smoke in the Ruined Castle area of the Blue Mountains on January 11. Hide Caption 20 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Protesters march through downtown Melbourne on Friday, January 10, in response to the ongoing bushfire crisis. Hide Caption 21 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia An aerial view shows a track running through trees that were scorched by bushfires in East Gippsland, Australia, on Thursday, January 9. Hide Caption 22 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A pile of wood chips burns at a timber mill in Eden, Australia, on January 9. Hide Caption 23 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Lisa Poulsen tends to her Clydesdale horse, Jake, on January 9. Jake suffered burn injuries in a bushfire on December 31. Hide Caption 24 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A small wave of black water full of burned debris breaks at a beach at Eden on January 9. Hide Caption 25 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A dead kangaroo lies on a burnt farm in Batlow. Hide Caption 26 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter backs away from flames after lighting a controlled burn near Tomerong on January 8. Hide Caption 27 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Stephenie Bailey is embraced on Wednesday, January 8, as she describes the impact the bushfires have had on her farm in Batlow. Hide Caption 28 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Charlotte O'Dwyer, the young daughter of Rural Fire Service volunteer Andrew O'Dwyer, wears her father's helmet during his funeral after being presented with a service medal in his honor by RFS Commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons on Tuesday, January 7, in Sydney. Hide Caption 29 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A resident throws a bucket of water onto a smoldering tree on his property on Monday, January 6, in Wingello, Australia. Hide Caption 30 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A military helicopter flies above a burning woodchip mill in Eden, New South Wales, on January 6. Hide Caption 31 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A Royal Australian Navy MH-60R Seahawk "Romeo" helicopter refuels onboard HMAS Adelaide during Operation Bushfire Assist, on Sunday, January 5, in this image provided by the Australian Department of Defence. HMAS Adelaide and army reserve forces have been assisting with bushfire evacuations on the southern coast of New South Wales. Hide Caption 32 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Families are evacuated by air from Mallacoota on January 5. Hide Caption 33 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A man walks past ash from bushfires washed up on a beach in Merimbula on January 5. Hide Caption 34 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia The flight deck of a C-130J Hercules is lit by the red glow of the fires below as the aircrew attempts to land in Merimbula to drop off fire and rescue crews to assist fighting the bushfires on January 5. Hide Caption 35 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia This satellite image provided by NASA on Saturday, January 4, shows smoke from fires burning in Victoria and New South Wales. Hide Caption 36 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A father holds his daughter as the skies above turn red during the day on January 4 in Mallacoota, Australia. Many parents with young children were stuck in Mallacoota after flights were grounded because of smoke and only school-aged children and older were allowed to evacuate by boat. Hide Caption 37 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A Royal Australian Navy crew unload luggage as evacuees from Mallacoota arrive aboard the MV Sycamore on January 4 at the port of Hastings, Australia. Hide Caption 38 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Smoke from wildfires shrouds a road near Moruya, Australia, on January 4. Hide Caption 39 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Nancy Allen stands outside her house as high winds push smoke and ash from the Currowan Fire toward Nowra in New South Wales on January 4. Hide Caption 40 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Evacuees board the Royal Australian Navy's MV Sycamore on January 3 in Mallacoota, Victoria, Australia. Navy ships plucked hundreds of people from beaches and tens of thousands were urged to flee before hot weather and strong winds in the forecast worsen Australia's already devastating wildfires. Hide Caption 41 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Massive smoke rises from wildfires burning in East Gippsland, Victoria on January 2. Hide Caption 42 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Royal Fire Service Commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons presents a posthumous Commendation for Bravery and Service on January 2 to the son of RFS volunteer Geoffrey Keaton, who was killed battling bushfires , at Keaton's funeral in Buxton, New South Wales. Hide Caption 43 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Boats are pulled ashore as smoke and wildfires rage on January 2 behind Lake Conjola. Hide Caption 44 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Cars line up as people evacuate the town of Batemans Bay in New South Wales on January 2. Hide Caption 45 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A satellite image released by Copernicus Sentinel dated December 31 shows bushfires burning across Australia. Hide Caption 46 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A kangaroo rushes past a burning house in Lake Conjola, Australia, on December 31. Hide Caption 47 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A man tries to defend a property in Lake Conjola on December 31. Hide Caption 48 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters hose down trees as they battle against bushfires around the town of Nowra in the Australian state of New South Wales on December 31, 2019. Thousands of holidaymakers and locals were forced to flee to beaches in fire-ravaged southeast Australia on December 31, as blazes ripped through popular tourist areas leaving no escape by land. Hide Caption 49 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A destroyed home in Sarsfield, East Gippsland, Victoria, on December 31. Hide Caption 50 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Children evacuated from areas affected by bushfires play at the showgrounds in the southern New South Wales town of Bega on December 31. Hide Caption 51 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A skycrane drops water on a bushfire burning near houses in Bundoora, Melbourne, on Monday, December 30. Hide Caption 52 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) captured this satellite image of the historic bushfires burning across Australia on December 26. Hide Caption 53 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison is briefed by fire officials at New South Wales Rural Fire Service control room in Sydney on December 22. Morrison arrived back in Sydney amid criticism after taking a family holiday to Hawaii during the bushfire emergency. Hide Caption 54 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Tributes for volunteer firemen Andrew O'Dwyer and Geoffrey Keaton are seen at Horsley Park Rural Fire Brigade in Sydney, Australia, on December 22. It's believed they were killed when their vehicle hit a tree before rolling off the road, the New South Wales Rural Fire Service said in a statement Hide Caption 55 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter battles the Gospers Mountain Fire in Bilpin, New South Wales, on Saturday, December 21. Hide Caption 56 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A charred bicycle lies on the ground in front of a house destroyed by bushfires on the outskirts of Bargo on December 21. Hide Caption 57 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Fire and rescue personnel monitor a bushfire as it burns near homes on the outskirts of Bilpin on Thursday, December 19. Hide Caption 58 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A property burns in Balmoral on December 19. Hide Caption 59 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A helicopter drops fire-retardant to protect a property in Balmoral. Hide Caption 60 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Police disperse demonstrators during a climate protest near Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison's official residence in Sydney, on December 19, during his absence on an overseas holiday, as bushfires burned across the region. Hide Caption 61 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Children swing into the Penrith river during a heatwave in Sydney on December 19. Hide Caption 62 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A landscape of burnt trees is pictured after a bushfire at Mount Weison, in the Blue Mountains, on Wednesday, December 18. Hide Caption 63 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A wallaby flees a fire burning near Mangrove Mountain, north of Sydney, on December 10. Hide Caption 64 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A smoke haze blankets Bondi Beach as the air quality index reaches higher than ten times hazardous levels in some suburbs of Sydney on December 10. Hide Caption 65 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia People join a guided climb of the Sydney Harbour Bridge as bushfire haze darkens the sky on December 6. Hide Caption 66 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia People are seen wearing face masks to protect against the poor air quality in Sydney on December 5. Hide Caption 67 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A bushfire burns out of control in the Blue Mountains of New South Wales on December 2, Hide Caption 68 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia An aerial view shows bushfires burning in the Richmond Valley on November 26. Hide Caption 69 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A CFA crew member rests after a day of maintaining controlled back burns in St Albans, Australia, on November 21. Hide Caption 70 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia An injured koala receives treatment after its rescue from a bushfire at the Port Macquarie Koala Hospital on November 19. The hospital said the fires have "decimated" the area, which is a key habitat and breeding ground for the marsupials. More than 350 koalas are feared to have been killed by bushfires in NSW, according to animal experts. Hide Caption 71 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters try to protect the Colo Heights Public School on November 19. Hide Caption 72 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Bushfire smoke clouds the sky over the Hawkesbury River in Brooklyn, Australia. Hide Caption 73 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters work on controlled back burns on November 14. Hide Caption 74 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia This satellite image shows wildfire smoke on November 14. Hide Caption 75 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A man uses a wet towel to help put out flames near the town of Taree on November 14. Hide Caption 76 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters organize their crews prior to working on controlled back burns in Sydney on November 14. Hide Caption 77 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Warren Smith pats his dog after returning to find his house destroyed near Nana Glen on November 13. Hide Caption 78 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Teresa de Ruyter, left, and Michelle Wilson embrace after returning to their homes near Nana Glen on November 13. Hide Caption 79 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters battle a spot fire in Hillville on November 13. Hide Caption 80 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Residents look on as thick smoke rises from bushfires near Nana Glen on November 12. Hide Caption 81 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison looks at a screen as he gets a briefing on the bushfire situation on November 12. Hide Caption 82 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Locals watch the fires impact farmland near Nana Glen on November 12. Hide Caption 83 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter mops up after a bushfire in the Sydney suburb of Llandilo on November 12. Hide Caption 84 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A fire and rescue team inspects damage around the village of Torrington on November 11. Hide Caption 85 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Andrew Mackenzie surveys the damage to the area around his home in Torrington. His home was spared, but his neighbors' house was burned to the ground. Hide Caption 86 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Smoke from the Gulf Road Fire fills the air in Glen Innes on November 11. Hide Caption 87 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A sign on a Taree fire station warns of "catastrophic" fire conditions. Hide Caption 88 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A lone joey is pictured on a scorched patch of ground in Torrington on November 11. Hide Caption 89 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Emergency crews tend to animals on a property in Torrington on November 11. Hide Caption 90 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Burnt trees dot the landscape in Old Bar on November 10. Hide Caption 91 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A firefighter works to contain a bushfire near Taree on November 10. Hide Caption 92 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A helicopter drops water on a bushfire in Old Bar on November 9. Hide Caption 93 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia This aerial photo, taken on November 9, shows bushfires in the northeastern part New South Wales. Hide Caption 94 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Fires burn in the distance as children play on a beach in Forster on November 9. Hide Caption 95 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A fire rages in Bobin on November 9. Hide Caption 96 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia The remains of a property are seen in Bobin on November 9. Hide Caption 97 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A plane drops fire retardant on a bushfire in Harrington on November 8. Hide Caption 98 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters try to put out a bushfire in Woodford on November 8. Hide Caption 99 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Police knock on the door of a house to warn residents of an out-of-control bushfire near Clumber on November 8. Hide Caption 100 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia A resident hoses smoldering logs as a bushfire burns in Woodford on November 8. Hide Caption 101 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia The sun is seen through heavy smoke as a bushfire burns in Woodford. Hide Caption 102 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Firefighters hose down an area in Woodford. Hide Caption 103 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia Forster residents watch as a water-bombing helicopter flies over a bushfire on November 7. Hide Caption 104 of 105 Photos: In photos: Bushfires rage through Australia In this handout photo from NASA's Aqua satellite, destructive bushfires are seen off the coast of New South Wales on November 7. Hide Caption 105 of 105
The weather gave firefighters a chance to "take a breath" as they prepared for more emergencies later in the week, Victoria fires incident controller Andy Gillham said , according to national broadcaster ABC.
NSW RFS spokesman James Morris said firefighters needed weeks of consistent showers to ease the fire threat.
"We've seen drought conditions so the ground is very hard. If we get a lot of rain in a short period of time, it'll sit on the surface and run away," he said.
There are 136 active blazes in NSW alone, including 69 that are uncontained, the NSW RFS said in a tweet early Monday. In Victoria state, there are still 31 active fires and more than 1.1 million hectares (4,247 square miles) of land has been burned, the Country Fire Authority said in a tweet
On Sunday, Prime Minister Scott Morrison cautioned that for some states, the most difficult fire seasons could be later in January and February. "The crisis is not over," he said. "There are months to go."
On Monday, Morrison announced that he would establish a 2 billion Australian dollar ($1.39 billion) National Bushfire Recovery Agency to help people hit by the "unprecedented bushfires" get the support they needed.
"It's a long road ahead and we will be with these communities every step of the way as they rebuild," he said.
The funds will be used to help "get communities back on their feet" by rebuilding roads, mental health support, and helping restore the local environment, Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said.
On Monday, the NSW police force said it had taken legal action against 183 people for bushfire-related offences since last November, including 24 who have been charged over allegedly deliberately-lit fires.
Morrison has been criticized for taking a vacation to Hawaii during the fires. But on Sunday, he said the government's response was the most significant and comprehensive ever to a natural disaster.
In a news release on Sunday, the Australia Defence Force said it was significantly increasing its fire support and had called up 3,000 army reservists and others with specialist capabilities.
As of Monday, HMAS Adelaide -- the biggest vessel in the Royal Australian Navy's fleet -- was moored off the coast near Eden, a seaside town in NSW that was affected by fires over the weekend. The ship has space for up to 5,000 evacuees.
JUST WATCHED Fire crews' life-or-death moments caught on video Replay More Videos ... MUST WATCH Fire crews' life-or-death moments caught on video 02:11
Over the weekend, thick smoke hung low over Eden, blocking out the sun and casting an ominous orange glow
On Sunday, police went door to door, boat to boat, telling people that it wasn't safe to stay. Some agreed to go, but others decided to stay put on informal evacuation centers -- a whale-watching tour boat and two tugboats moored at the wharf.
On Monday, the red glow was gone and some people started returning to their homes.
Ike, 5, and his sister Kalani, 6, with their mother Louise during a tense weekend on the family's fishing vessel where they took shelter from flames in Eden, NSW.
Louise Warren said she had lived in Eden all her life and was accustomed to annual fires, but she had never seen anything like this.
On Sunday, Warren, her husband and two children fled to the family's fishing trawler as the sky turned orange, then red, then black. "I just want everything back to normal," she said.
Kerrie Chester spent Saturday night on one of the tugs with up to 50 people, many children and elderly people, as well as the families' dogs. "I haven't slept all night," Chester said Sunday. She spent the night outside on the wharf, watching to see if the fire leaped across the bay.
"I think it was the not knowing, because you couldn't see it across the bay," she said.