The Republican National Committee (RNC) on Thursday released classified nondisclosure agreements signed by a pair of Hillary Clinton’s State Department aides in which they promised to protect classified information.
The release of the documents from Jacob Sullivan and Bryan Pagliano comes hours before Clinton is set to deliver a major national security address attacking presumptive GOP presidential nominee Donald Trump, and appear to be designed to undercut her claims to be the most responsible steward of American power.
{mosads}“Hillary Clinton endangered our national security and created a culture where top staffers went rogue, silenced career officials and hid a reckless email scheme that placed her political ambitions above all else,” RNC Chairman Reince Priebus said in a statement. “These records show that like Clinton, her closest aides did not meet their responsibilities to protect classified information regardless of whether it was marked.”
The agreements show that Sullivan — a top adviser who now works on Clinton’s presidential campaign — and Pagliano — the IT aide believed to have set up and maintained Clinton’s controversial private server — swore to protect “marked or unmarked classified information, including email communications.”
Sullivan sent more than 800 emails that now include information marked as classified, according to the State Department. None of those emails were marked as classified at the time they were sent.
Pagliano, meanwhile, is believed to have been the point man responsible for the server’s upkeep and functioning throughout Clinton’s time as secretary of State. On Wednesday, his lawyers disclosed that he would refuse to answer questions as part of an ongoing lawsuit connected to Clinton’s email setup.
The FBI is currently investigating Clinton’s server and the possibility that classified information was mishandled.
The RNC’s release is a clear ploy to counterbalance her attacks on Trump, a businessman with no foreign policy experience. Clinton’s inability to calm the furor surrounding her email arrangement has exposed a vulnerability ahead of this fall’s general election.
Trump has taken radical national security stances — such as suggesting that more countries ought to acquire nuclear weapons and proposing forms of torture “much worse” than waterboarding — and Clinton appears primed to paint him as inexperienced and naive.
On Thursday afternoon, the Democratic front-runner is planning to give a speech in San Diego speaking “extensively about the reasons why Donald Trump is unqualified to be our commander-in-chief,” Sullivan said in a statement previewing the speech.
Clinton’s remarks “will go beyond specific policies and she’ll make clear that the choice in this election goes beyond partisanship: Donald Trump is unlike any presidential nominee we’ve seen in modern times and he is fundamentally unfit for the job,” Sullivan added.