DETROIT - The effort to revive the gullwing-doored, stainless steel-bodied DeLorean cars of the 1980s appears to be alive and well, though not without its hurdles.
Texas-based DeLorean Motor Company, which has for years been refurbishing original DMC-12s, is moving forward on plans to begin producing new versions of the iconic car, made famous by the "Back to the Future" movies, but also awaits final regulatory approval.
The new DMC cars will look similar to the originals, but with upgrades from Reagan-era levels of power and technology.
Prices haven't been set yet, but DMC vice president James Espey said he expects the cars to be in the $100,000 range.
If all goes well, production will begin in April or May of next year, Espey said.
DMC plans to make just one car a month in its first year of production, before ramping up to one unit a week, making a grand total of just 50 DMC cars a year.
"We never intend to build more than 50 per year," Espey said.
A DeLorean DMC-12 in Ann Arbor, Michigan. Dominic Valente | The Ann Arbor News
DMC will be using a more powerful engine than the original, 138-horsepower Peugeot-Renault-Volvo V-6 produced for the original DeLorean DMC-12 in the early 1980s.
The car will in fact be at least twice as powerful, and lighter, so DeLorean fans can expect drastically improved performance.
The exterior dimensions of the wedge-shaped car, designed by the renowned Giorgetto Giugiaro, will be virtually unchanged.
The wheels need to be updated, however. Espey said it is now impossible to get performance tires in the DMC-12's original wheel sizes of 14-inches in the front and 15-inches in the rear. The new DMC cars will instead be outfitted with 17- and 18-inch wheels. That will also allow the company to use better brakes, Espey said.
The company has been making improvements to the chassis and electrical system, and many changes are in store for the interior.
The original DMC-12 was outfitted with an AM/FM cassette deck, but DMC is working with a supplier for in-car entertainment, high-end instrument clusters and some other luxury items such as heated and cooled seats.
A look at the interior of the original DeLorean DMC-12
Most of DMC's suppliers are already lined up, but the company still needs to wait for federal regulators to set rules on new legislation, passed last year.
If things fall through with U.S. regulations, the company has a Plan B, Espey said. That backup plan is to export the cars to foreign markets.
However, "We're certainly planning that (regulators) will be on time," he said. "We're spending money like they will be on time, so I hope they are."
DMC has 90 percent of the inventory it needs ready to go but the remaining parts are pricey, and some have long lead times.
The automaker also still needs to have an engine that is certified for emissions.
Currently, the only engine available that meets requirements for the low-volume program is from General Motors, Espey said. The problem with GM's engines for the program is that they are all V-8s, which are a bit large for the DMC-12.
DMC could dump one into the rear-engine coupe, but it would require changing some of the structure of the car, Espey said. However, at least three other manufacturers that Espy did not want to name are also seeking certification for the program.
In any case, DMC expects to have an engine lined up by the end of July.
The company is hoping for some finality on rules that are supposed to be hatched out of legislation, passed last year, that makes the DMC cars' revival possible.
That legislation, fittingly called the Low Volume Vehicle Manufacturers Act of 2015, allows small companies to build up to 325 replicas per year of cars built at least 25 years ago.
The law requires the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration to put in place final regulations, which the two regulators are supposed to do by December.
DMC is concerned with the agencies' progress, as evidenced in its latest update this week. The company said it met with members of Congress to express concern with the "glacial pace of the rule-making progress" and how it will affect the production plans of DMC and others.
Messages were left Tuesday with NHTSA and the EPA.
David Muller is the automotive and business reporter for MLive Media Group in Detroit. Email him at dmuller@mlive.com, follow him on Twitter or find him on Facebook.